CONTENT 
Sl.No
Particulars 

Origin of the crop 

Importance of sugarcane 

Scientific name of sugarcane 

Morphology of sugarcane 

Nutritional value of sugarcane 

Important zones for sugarcane cultivation in India 

Crop distribution 

Demand and supply scenario of sugarcane produce 

Area, production and yield of sugarcane in major growing states 

Area, production and yield of sugarcane in major growing countries 

Export import status of sugarcane produce 

Varietal development 

State wise yield potential recorded under FLDs (AICRP Projects) vis-
à-vis National/ State average yield and yield gap analysis 

Temperature for different critical stages of sugarcane 

Reduction in yield of sugarcane due to rise in temperature 

Recommendation for cultivation of crop in view of climate change 
:Abiotic and biotic stresses 

Genetic breakthrough for yield improvement from ICAR / SAUs/ 
International organizations 

Status of Transgenic Sugarcane in India 

Advance tools to be applied like transgenic, genomics etc 

Varietal Planning of sugarcane 

Tissue culture 

Polythene bag technology 

Raising of seedlings through bud chip 

Spaced transplanting technology 

Major crop sequences/ rotations followed in various states and 
suggestion crop sequences by SAUs/ ICAR 

State and season wise time of sowing and harvesting 

Planting of sugarcane crop 

Resource Conservation Technology in Sugarcane 

Seeding technologies –seed rate, distance, depth, plant population 

Fertilizer management – recommended dose for different ecologies, 
micro nutrients, organic manure , application method 

Water management: application and conservation methods, their 
water use efficiency, water requirement of crops, critical stages for 
irrigation and probable losses if not applied 

Weed Management – important weed flora, herbicides recommended 
with dose application time, and different methods (mechanical , 
biological etc.)

Plant protection – important insects pests and diseases and their 
effect on yield loss, chemical, biological and cultural control measures 

Harvesting, threshing and storage – harvesting and threshing 
methods 
(manual/ mechanical): 

Mechanization in sugarcane cultivation 

Machinery adopted for mechanical sugarcane cultivation in India 

Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative (SSI) 

Sugarcane prevailing cropping system in India 

Problems in prevalent cropping system, uptake of nutrients, 
deterioration of soil health, depletion of underground water 

Industrial use of main product and by product. Products derived from 
main product and by product and their uses 

Crop Development Programme 

Special initiatives taken for encouraging the cultivation of the 
sugarcane crop 

Outcomes/ recommendations of annual workshop conducted by 
ICAR/ SAUs 

Recommendation of important conference / seminar / brain storming 
sessions related to crop 

Name of important national and international organizations 
 involved for crop improvement 

Enlist the national and international important website informative for 
farmers, development officers, policy planners and scientific 
community 

Strategies for sugarcane productivity enhancement 

Recommendations of Dr. C. Rajagopalachari Committee Report.

ANNEXURES 
S.No. 
Particular 
 I(a) 
State wise area of sugarcane crop in India 
 I(b) 
State wise production of sugarcane crop in India 
 I(c ) 
State wise productivity of sugarcane crop in India 
II 
State wise sugar production during last 10 years 
III 
Area, Production and Yield of Sugarcane in India 
IV 
Area, production and yield of sugarcane in major growing countries (2006-2010) 
V 
Gap of yield (t/ha) of sugarcane in India with other countries 
VI 
Export Import status of sugarcane produce 
VII 
Country wise export of sugar from India by ISEC during 2001 to 2010 
VIII 
Released and notified varieties of sugarcane 
IX 
Varieties resistant to stresses, suitability to biotic stresses 
X 
Sugarcane varieties tolerant to drought, water logging and salinity Developed in India 
XI 
State wise farmer’s preferred / ruling varieties under cultivation 
XII 
Sugarcane, sugar and molasses production at a glance 
XIII 
Statement showing factories in operation, opening stocks, production, imports, consumption and 
exports of sugar (lakh tonnes) during last 10 years 
XIV 
Utilization of sugarcane for different purposes 
XV 
State wise utilization (%) of sugarcane for sugar production in major states 
XVI 
State wise cane crushed (in ‘000 tonnes) by sugar factories in India 
XVII 
Statement showing the minimum statutory price/ fair & remunerative price of sugarcane fixed by 
the government 
XVIII 
Per capita consumption of sugar, gur & khandsari 
XIX 
Temperature requirement for different growth stages of sugarcane 
XX 
Important growing / Planting and harvesting time of sugarcane in different States of India 
XXI 
Extent of losses due to different insect & pests in India 
XXII 
Management schedule for insect pests of sugarcane for Subtropical India 
XXIII 
Management schedule for insect pests of sugarcane for Tropical India 
XXIV 
Important Diseases of Sugarcane and Their Management 
XXV 
State wise number of sugar factories in operation in India 
XXVI 
State wise duration of crushing season for sugarcane in India 
XXVII 
State wise average sugar recovery percent cane in India 
XXVIII 
State wise & sector wise installed annual sugar production capacity and utilisation of capacity 
during last five years 
XXIX 
State wise sugar production (‘000 ton) during last 10 years 
XXX 
Export- import of sugar on financial year basis from 2000-01 onwards 
XXXI 
State wise rate of cess/ purchase tax on sugarcane paid by sugar factories 
XXXII 
Progress report of sugarcane Development Scheme under Macro Management. 
XXXIII 
Statement showing the minimum statutory price/ fair & remunerative price of sugarcane fixed by 
the government

Chapter – 1: Crop description 
1.1 
Origin of the crop: 
Cultivation of sugarcane in India dates back to the Vedic period. Barber (1931) 
was of the opinion that the thin Indian canes probably originated in the moist parts of 
north eastern Indian, from some plants closely related to Saccharum spontaneum 
(Kans). It belongs to family Gramineae (Poaceae), class monocotyledons and order 
glumaceae sub family panicoidae, tribe Andripogoneae and sub tribe saccharininea. The 
cultivated canes belong to two main groups: (a) thin, hardy north Indian types S.barberi 
and S.Sinense and (b) thick, juicy noble canes Saccharum officinarum. Highly prized 
cane is S. officinarum. It is probably evolved from S. robustum by introgression from 
other genera. It is agreed that the origin of S. officinarum is the Indo-Myanmar china 
border with New Guinea as the main centre of diversity. The process of nobilization in 
sugarcane is the modified back crossing of wild cane. S. spontaneum with S. officinarum 
and a repeated back crossings to the noble parent (S. Officinarum). It is stated that the 
cradle of cultivated sugarcane is the region where two wild species i.e., Saccharum 
spontaneum and Saccharum robustum are found. Saccharum robustum is derived from 
natural crossing between Saccharum spontaneum and Miscanthis floridulus and the 
origin is New Guinea. 
 
1.2 
Importance of Sugarcane: 
Sugarcane is a most important cash crop of India. It involves less risk and 
farmers are assured up to some extent about return even in adverse condition. In 
agriculture sector, sugarcane shared 7% of the total value of agriculture output and 
occupied 2.6% of India’s gross cropped area during 2006-07. Sugarcane provides raw 
material for the second largest agro-based industry after textile. About 527 working 
sugar factories were located in the country during 2010-11 with total crushing capacity of 
about 242 lakh tonnes. The sugar industry is an instrumental in generating the sizable 
employment in the rural sector directly and through its ancillary units. It is estimated that 
about 50 million farmers and their dependents are engaged in the cultivation of 
sugarcane and about 0.5 million skilled and unskilled workers are engaged in sugar 
factories and its allied industries. The sugar industry in India has been a focal point for 
socio-economic development in the rural areas by mobilizing rural resources, generating 
employment and enhancing farm income. Some of the sugar factories have also 
diversified into bye-products basis industries and have invested and put up distilleries, 
organic chemical plants, paper, ice board factories and cogeneration plant. 
 
1.3 
Scientific name of Sugarcane: 
The genus Saccharum has six important species viz., with their common name 
(i) Saccharum officinarum, 
(ii) S. Sinense 
(iii) S.barberi 
(iv) S.robustum 
(v) S.spontanuem. 
(vi) S.ilude

The first three species are the cultivated species and remaining is wild ones. 
S. officinarum species is widely cultivated in India because of high sucrose content. 
 
1.4 
Morphology of Sugarcane: 
Sugarcane is a tall perennial plant growing erect even up to 5 or 6 metres and 
produce multiple stems or culms each of which consist of a series of nodes separated by 
internodes. The plant is composed of four principal parts, root system, stalk, leaves and 
inflorescence. Following germination, the terminal vegetative bud of each shoot lays 
down a series of node. The root system is fibrous and consists of two types of roots, 
namely 'sett roots' and 'shoot roots'. When sugarcane sett is planted in the soil and 
covered with moist soil, the root primordia (translucent dots) situated at the base of 
every cane joint is activated and produces roots. These roots are known as 'sett roots' 
and are mostly temporary. After the emergence of the primary shoot from the bud, other 
roots are produced from lower rings of the lower nodes of the shoot. Later, this process 
occurs progressively in upper rings of the nodes near the soil surface. Those formed first 
go downwards, where as those formed near the soil. Surface roots grow in upper layer 
of soil for providing anchorage for the plant. These roots produced from shoot are known 
as 'shoot roots'. These are permanent roots and are thick, fleshy and white in colour. 
New roots are continually produced from tillers. 
 
Sheath: Green with red blotches; moderate to heavy bloom; scarious border prominent; 
sheath splitting occasional Clasping; Spines present on the middle of the sheath; 
deciduous. 
 
Blade Joint: Transverse Mark: Purplish green; medium: fair bloom. Ligule: Medium; 
Crescentiform; symmetrical; gradually tapering towards the edges. Ligular Process: 
Indicated on one side. 
 
Inflorescence: The inflorescence of sugarcane generally called the 'arrow' is an open 
panicle. It is long (30 centimeter or more) and tapering. The arrangement of the spikelets 
is racemose, that is, the oldest flowers are at the bottom and the youngest at the top. 
The flowers open in succession over a number of days. Flowers have both male and 
female organs, but not all produce fertile pollen only few exception. Some of the varieties 
have fertile pollens but they are usually small and low vitality. Sugarcane usually flowers 
at the age of ten to twelve months, but some varieties in north India do not flower at all. 
Due to this fact cane has so long been propagated vegetatively by cuttings of 
sugarcane. Cane produced from seed is not so vigorous, but it is important for breeders. 
 
Cane: Medium-thick; slightly staggered; slightly oval in cross section, internal tissue 
yellow with purple tinge: rind hard; pith present as small cavity. Yellowish green with 
purple tinge; turning dark green on exposure having red blotches; growth ring greenish 
yellow, root zone purplish yellow. Cylindrical with a tendency to become conoidal; splits 
present; ivory markings present; weather markings present; bud groove rather distinct; 
moderate bloom throughout. Wax Band: Medium; constricted often merges with the

general bloom. Growth Ring: Medium; slightly swollen; occasionally the growth ring 
width and root zone width ale found to be almost equal. Root Zone: Narrow; slightly 
constricted; generally has two rows of staggered root eyes. 
 
Node & bud: Nods are slightly depressed; leaf scar slightly inclined. Buds are medium, 
plumpy, ovate; occasionally hairs at the tip of the bud noticed; inserted at leaf scar. 
Growth phases: Sugarcane is a C4 plant having high efficiency in storing solar energy 
and most efficient converter of solar energy, thus having potential to produce huge 
amounts of biomass. Sugarcane has essentially four growth phases viz. Germination 
phase, Tillering phase, Grand growth phase, Maturity and ripening phase though it is 
difficult to recognize distinct duration of each. 
(http://www.ikisan.com/crop%20specific/eng/links/ap_sugarcaneMorphology.shtml) 
 
It is now widely accepted that India is the original home of Saccharum species. 
Saccharum barberi and Polynesian group of island especially New Guinea is the centre 
of origin of S. officinarum. Many of clones belonging to the S. barberi have been under 
cultivation in the sub tropical region of India since ages. 
 
1.5 
Nutritional value of Sugarcane: 
The juice Sugarcane per serving (28.35 grams) contain Energy-111.13 kJ 
(26.56 kcal), Carbohydrates-27.51 g, Protein-0.27 g, Calcium11.23 mg (1%), Iron 0.37 mg 
(3%), Potassium 41.96 mg (1%), Sodium 17.01 mg (1%) 
Source: Nutrient Information from ESHA Research 
 
1.6 
Important regions/ zones for sugarcane cultivation in India: 
Broadly there are two distinct agro-climatic regions of sugarcane cultivation in 
India, viz., tropical and subtropical. However, five agro-climatic zones have been 
identified mainly for the purpose of varietal development. They are 
i. 
North Western Zone 
ii. North Central Zone 
iii. North Eastern Zone, 
iv. Peninsular Zone 
v. Coastal Zone. 
Tropical region shared about 45% and 55% of the total sugarcane area and 
production in the country, respectively along with the average productivity of 77 t/ha 
(2011-12). Sub-tropical region accounted for about 55% and 45% of total area and 
production of sugarcane with an average productivity about 63 t/ha (2011-12) 
1.7 
Tropical Sugarcane region 
The tropical sugarcane region consists of sugarcane agro climatic zone 4 
(Peninsular zone) and 5(Coastal zone) which includes the states of Maharashtra, 
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Goa, Pondicherry

and Kerala. In the coastal areas of A.P. and Tamil Nadu there are extensive sugarcane 
areas with high sugarcane productivities. Floods, water logging and diseases such as 
red rot are the main problems. In the tropical region, sugarcane gets more or less ideal 
climatic conditions for its growth. It is cultivated with better package of practices and 
higher irrigation levels. The growing season is long with more equitable and favourable 
conditions without serious weather extremes. Being a tropical country, the agro-climatic 
conditions of tropical India favour higher sugarcane and sugar yields. The tropical region 
contributes about 55 per cent to the total cane production in the country. The 
productivities are higher. The average cane yields of the major states of the region 
(Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat) is around 80 
tonnes per hectare. Maharashtra and the adjoining area of Karnataka, Gujarat and A.P. 
record higher sugar recoveries. Long hours of sunshine, cool nights with clear skies and 
the latitudinal position of this area are highly favourable for sugar accumulation. This is 
why average recoveries of Maharashtra and Gujarat are highest in the country. Moisture 
stress during the early part of the cane growths mostly during March to June, is an 
important problem. 
1.8 
Sub-tropical sugarcane region 
Around 55 per cent of total cane area in the country is in the sub-tropics. U.P, 
Bihar, Haryana and Punjab comes under this region. Extremes of climate is the 
characteristic feature of this region. During April to June, the weather is very hot and dry. 
July to October is rainy season accounting for most of the rainfall from S-W monsoon 
rains. December and January are the very cold months temperature touching sub-zero 
levels in many places. November to March are cool months with clear sky. The N-W 
zone comprising the areas in Haryana, Punjab, Western Rajasthan and Western U.P. 
has very low temperature in December-January which often cause frost. During May and 
June, the temperatures are extremely high. Because of extremes of weather, the active 
sugarcane growth is restricted to 4-5 months only. In Eastern U.P, Bihar, and West 
Bengal, sugarcane suffers due to floods and water logging during monsoon months. The 
cane yields are lower in the subtropics due to short growing season, moisture stress, 
more pest and disease problem, floods and water logging and very poor ratoons. The 
average yield of the four major states (U.P, Bihar, Punjab and Haryana) is around 60 
tonnes per hectare. However, there is considerable potential to be exploited. 
1.9 
Crop distribution: 
Since 1930-31 the area of sugarcane in the country is increased by about 4.3 
times and production by about 9.8 times because of the rise in productivity of sugarcane 
by about 2.28 times, however, during the last 10-15 years there is no much increase in 
productivity of sugarcane in the country.

1.10 Demand and supply scenario of sugarcane produce: 
The main product of sugarcane is sugar which is produced in the sugar factories 
through various processes. The domestic demand of sugar is around 22-23 million 
tonnes annually where as the production of sugar in India is about 26 million tones 
annually. Up to the year 2011-12, Maharashtra is the largest producer of sugar 
contribute about 34% of sugar in the country followed by Uttar Pradesh.

Chapter – 2 : Comparative analysis 
 
2.1 
Area, production and yield of sugarcane in major growing states: 
In Tropical zone Maharashtra is the major sugarcane growing state covering 
about 9.4 lakh ha area with production of 61.32 Million ton, whereas the productivity of 
Tamil Nadu is highest in tropical zones. Uttar Pradesh is the highest sugarcane 
producing State in sub tropical zone having area about 22.77 Lakh ha with the 
production of 135.64 Million Ton cane whereas Haryana has highest productivity of 
sugarcane in Sub tropical zone. Despite long tradition and large area in India, the 
average productivity of sugarcane is low with certain regions reporting yields as low as 
40 t/ha only. The State wise and zone wise area, production and productivity of 
sugarcane during the last 5 years is given at Annexure- I (a,b,c). The production of 
sugar in India during last 10 year is given in Annexure-II. The area production and yield 
of sugarcane since 1930-31 is given at Annexure-III. 
 
2.2 
Area, production and yield of sugarcane in major growing countries: 
Brazil is major producing country with an area about 90.77 lakh ha and 
production of about 717.46 Million ton followed by India. Amongst 10 major producing 
country Colombia has the highest yield of sugarcane due to the richest biodiversities in 
the world and has access to multiple climates. The area, production and yield of 10 
major sugarcane producing country vis-e-vis world during the last 5 years is given at 
Annexure-IV. 
2.3 
Gap of Yield with other countries: 
There is a vast yield gap amongst the country with respect to India. Amongst the 
10 major sugarcane growing countries the highest yield gap of 36.96 t/ha was recorded 
during 2009 between India and Colombia. The productivity of sugarcane in Philippines is 
also fairly high with respect to India. The yield gap of sugarcane in India with respect to 
10 major sugarcane producing countries during the last 5 years is given at Annexure-V. 
2.4 
Export import status of sugarcane produce: 
Sugarcane as such is neither exported nor imported, however the sugar which is 
a main produce of sugarcane crop is exported and imported as per the Government 
policies. The export import of sugar during last 12 years is at Annexure-VI. Country 
Wise Export (Tonnes) of sugar from India By ISEC during 2001 To 2010 is at Annexure-
VII.

Chapter 3: Varietal development 
3.1 
Important Sugarcane varieties released and notified are given at Annexure-VIII. 
Varieties resistant to stresses and suitability to biotic stresses are at Annexure-IX and 
tolerant to drought, water logging and salinity are at Annexure-X. 
 
The ruling varieties of sugarcane in different States are given as under: 
Andhra Pradesh: 
Early varieties: Co.6907, 84A125, 81A99, 83A30, 85A261, 87A298, Co.8014, 
86V96, 91V83. 
Mid-late Varieties: COA7607, CO8021, COT.8201, Co7805, COV92102 (83V15), 
83V288. 
Late varieties: Co.7219, CoR8001, 87A380, Co7706 
Bihar: Bo 99, CoP 9301, CoSe 98231, CoS 8436, Cos 95255, Bo 102, Bo 91, Bo 
110, CoP 9206, CoSe 95422, CoSe 92423, UP 9530. 
Gujarat: Co 86002, Co 86032, CoSi 95071, Co 86249, CoN 05072. 
Haryana: CoJ 64, CoS 8436, CoS 88230, CoS 767. 
Karnataka: Co 94012, CoC 671, Co 92020, Co 8014, Co 86032, Co 62175, Co 
8371, Co 740, Co 8011. 
Maharashtra: CoC 671, Co 86032, Co 8011, Co 94012, CoM 265, Co 92005. 
Odisha:Co 62175, CoA 89085, Co 87A298, Co86V96 
Punjab: CoJ 85, CoJ 88, CoS8436, CoH 119, Co89003. 
Tamil Nadu: Co 94012, Co 94010, CoC 24. 
Uttar Pradesh:CoS 8436, Coj 64, CoS88230, CoS 98231, CoS 767, CoS 8432, 
CoPt 90223, CoS 92423, CoS97264, CoLk 8102. 
 
Uttrakhand: CoS 8436, CoS 88230, Cos 767, CoS 97264, CoSe 92423. 
State wise farmer’s preferred / ruling varieties under cultivation separately for less 
than ten years old and more than 10 years old – with reasons towards their preference 
by farmers is given at Annexure-XI 
3.2 
State wise yield potential recorded under FLDs (AICRP Projects) vis-à-vis 
National/ State average yield and yield gap analysis. 
The state wise yield potential recorded under FLDs vis-à-vis state average yield 
and gaps in yield are given below:

The State wise/technology wise yield gap during the year 2009-10 
 
Sl.No. 
State 
Technology demonstrated 
Potential 
yield (FLD) 
State 
yield 
State 
Yield gap 
National 
Yield gap* 
A. 
Tropical region 

Andhra 
Pradesh 
Ratoon Management 
84.00 
74.11 
9.89 
13.95 

Gujarat
Integrated disease and pest 
management 
112.00 
80.52 
 
 
31.48 
41.95 
Drip fertigation 
126.50 
45.98 
56.45 
Intercropping with oilseeds (S-
82.00t/ha & G-980 Kg/ha.) 
 
 
 
Ratoon Management 
112.19 
84.87 
12.19 
42.14 

Maharashtra
 
Weed Management 
130.90 
46.03 
60.85 
Ratoon management 
170.46 
85.59 
100.41 
Full package of practice 
272.00 
187.13 
201.95 

Karnataka 
(2008-09) 
Integrated nutrient management 
149.10 
88.65 
60.45 
79.05 
Relay cropping of sugarcane with 
tobacco S-110.86 & T-13.16 
 
 
 
Dual row planting and drip irrigation 
128.63 
39.98 
58.58 
Ratoon management 
112.68 
24.03 
42.63 

Tamil Nadu 
(2008-09) 
Wider row planting 
132.50 
108.15 
24.35 
62.45 
Paired row with drip fertigation 
178.00 
69.85 
107.95 
Performance of bio-fertilizers 
146.50 
38.35 
76.45 

Kerala
Ratoon management 
88.07 
95.00 
-6.93 
18.02 
Irrigation Management 
108.64 
13.64 
38.59 
 
 
B.
Sub-tropical region 

Uttarakhand 
Inter-cropping with Mung bean 
with sugarcane 
75.70 
 
60.83 
14.87 
5.55 

U.P.
Recommended package of 
practice 
123.50 
59.25 
64.25 
53.45 
Trash mulching 
85.50 
26.25 
15.45 

Punjab
Integrated weed management 
91.80 
61.67 
30.13 
21.75 
Management of late planted 
sugarcane 
83.50 
21.83 
13.45 
Integrated disease and pest 
management 
75.00 
13.33 
4.95 
Integrated nutrient management 
97.00 
35.33 
26.95 
Inter-cropping with summer 
mung 
101.30 
39.63 
31.25 
* National yield = 70.05 t/ha. 
Source: Progress report during AICRP Meeting 2009-10.

3.3 
In India 2011-12 about 263.43 Lakh ton sugar and 118.24 lakh ton molasses were 
produced by 529 sugar factories with average sugar recovery of 10.25%. The area, 
production, yield, number of factories, sugar and molasses production and sugar 
recovery is given at Annexure-XII. In India out of 263.43 lakh ton sugar produced during 
2011-12, 220 lakh ton is consumed domestically and 33.9 lakh ton exported. The details 
of number of factories in operation, opening stocks, production, imports, consumption 
and exports of sugar (lakh tonnes) during last 10 years is given at Annexure XIII. On an 
average 72% of cane used for the production of white sugarc, 16% for gur and 
Khandsari and rest of about 12% is used for seed and feed purposes. The details of 
utilization of sugarcane for different purposes is given at Annexure XIV. Amongst the 
Indian States, Maharashtra recorded (94.14%) utilization of sugarcane for the production 
of sugar and Uttrakhand recorded least (30.99%). The details of state wise utilization (%) 
of sugarcane for sugar production in major states is given at Annexure XV. In India, 
Maharashtra State crushed maximum sugarcane followed by Uttar Pradesh. The state 
wise cane crushed (in ‘000 tonnes) by sugar factories in India is given at Annexure XVI. 
 
3.4 
For the year 2012-13 the Government of India has fixed fair and remunerated price for 
sugarcane as Rs. 170/qntl linked with 9.5% sugar recovery and premium of Rs. 1.79/qntl 
for every 0.1 % increase in sugar recovery. The details of price trend fixed by the 
government is given at Annexure XVII. On an average an Indian consumes about 23 Kg 
sugar, fur and khansari in a year. The per capita consumption of sugar, gur & khandsari 
is given at Annexure XVIII.

Chapter 4: Climatic requirement 
4.1 
Temperature for different critical stages of sugarcane: 
The critical stages of germination are tillering, early growth, active growth and 
elongation. Optimum temperature for sprouting (germination) of stem cuttings is 32° to 
38°C. It slows down below 25°C, reaches plateau between 30°-34°C, reduces above 
35°C and practically stops when the temperature is above 38°C. Temperatures above 
38°C reduce the rate of photosynthesis and increase respiration. For ripening, however, 
relatively low temperatures in the range of 12° to 14° are desirable. The temperature 
requirement for different growth stages of sugarcane is given at Annexure-XIX 
 
4.2 
Reduction in yield of sugarcane due to rise in temperature: 
 
The sugarcane productivity and juice quality are profoundly influenced by 
weather conditions prevailing during the various crop-growth sub-periods. Sugar 
recovery is highest when the weather is dry with low humidity; bright sunshine hours, 
cooler nights with wide diurnal variations and very little rainfall during ripening period. 
These conditions favour high sugar accumulation. The climatic conditions like very high 
temperature or very low temperature deteriorate the juice quality and thus affecting the 
sugar quality. Favourable climate like warm and humid climate favour the insect pests 
and diseases, which cause much damage to the quality and yield of its juice and finally 
sucrose contents. Short days of winter reduce tillering, produce thinner long plants, with 
less 
sucrose 
contents. 
Heavy 
rains 
create 
water 
logging 
conditions 
(www.sugarcanecrops.com). 
 
4.3 
Recommendation for cultivation of crop in view of climate change: 
 
Several geopolitical factors, aggravated by worries of global warming, have been 
fueling the search for and production of renewable energy worldwide for the past few 
years. Such demand for renewable energy is likely to benefit the sugarcane ethanol 
industry, not only because sugarcane ethanol has a positive energetic balance and 
relatively low production costs, but also because ethanol has been successfully 
produced and used as biofuel in the country since the 1970s. However, environmental 
and social impacts associated with ethanol production can become important obstacles 
to sustainable biofuel production worldwide. Atmospheric pollution from burning of 
sugarcane for harvesting, degradation of soils and aquatic systems, and the exploitation 
of cane cutters are among the issues that deserve immediate attention. The expansion 
of sugarcane crops to the areas presently cultivated for soybeans also represent an 
environmental threat, because it may increase deforestation pressure from soybean 
crops. Recommendations include proper planning and environmental risk assessments 
for the expansion of sugarcane to new regions, improvement of land use practices to 
reduce soil erosion and nitrogen pollution, proper protection of streams and riparian 
ecosystems, banning of sugarcane burning practices, and fair working conditions for 
sugarcane cutters. 
Read More: http://www.esajournals.org/doi/abs/10.1890/07-1813.1

Chapter-5: Genetic Potentiality advancement 
5.1 
Genetic break through for yield improvement from ICAR / SAUs/ 
International organizations: 
There is no commercially grown transgenic sugarcane. Research and 
development of transgenic sugarcane has been identified in: Australia, Argentina, Brazil, 
Cuba, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Mauritius, Myanmar, South Africa, USA, Venezuela 
Brazil: First Transgenic Sugarcane: 
Brazil, the top producer of ethanol derived from sugarcane has developed its first 
transgenic sugarcane that contains the gene for drought tolerance. The research 
in Brasilia at the Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuaria (EMBRAPA) on the 
introduction of drought tolerant gene DREB2A into sugarcane was started in 2008. 
Through biolistic transformation method, transgenic sugarcane plants were developed 
and evaluated and selected in a greenhouse. The transgenic plants will be evaluated for 
their tolerance to drought by May 2012. Selection of the best performance both in the 
agronomic and desired characteristics will follow the evaluation process set by the 
National Technical Committee (CTNBio). This is the first transgenic sugarcane 
developed which will open possibilities for the introduction of other traits into sugarcane 
beneficial to farmers, consumers and the industry. 
Source: Crop Biotech Update, 27th May 2011 
 
 
5.2 
Status of Transgenic Sugarcane in India 
The Sugarcane Breeding Institute, Coimbatore has developed transgenic 
sugarcane incorporating gene constructs. The molecular marker technologies offer more 
precision to sugarcane breeding, transgenic technology gives a new dimension to the 
varietal development programmes. Scientists at the Coimbatore-based premier 
Sugarcane Breeding Institute (SBI) have developed transgenic varieties, which are 
resistant to the dreaded red-rot disease and borer pests. They identified the genes 
resistant to the red-rot and pests from indigenous sugarcane species, particularly from 
the wild, in collaboration with the New Delhi-based National Research for Plant 
Biotechnology (NRPB). The scientists have developed the transgenic varieties by 
bombarding the genes with a particle gun into the subject sugarcane plant known for 
very high sucrose yield such as COC-671 and screened them for red-rot disease 
resistance. 
 
5.3 
Advance tools to be applied if any like transgenic, genomics etc.: 
SBI has used the molecular technologies in introgression of wild species and 
developed sugarcane transgenics that cane agriculture faced serious challenges in 
terms of sustainability. High cost of production, depleting natural resources, climate 
change, non-availability of labour, emerging new pests and diseases have impacted 
cane productivity and sustainability. Further studies conducted in India, Mauritius, South

Africa and Trinidad showed a 30 per cent and more loss in productivity for every two 
degree centigrade increase in temperature. Ethanol production: While sustainability has 
been a cause for concern in cane agriculture, the demand for sugar in the country by 
2030 has been estimated at 36 million tonnes for which cane production should be 500 
million tonnes. This is 40 per cent higher than the current production. Besides this, 
sugarcane itself is emerging as an important energy crop contributing to cogeneration 
and ethanol production. The current level of ethanol production is barely adequate to 
meet 10 per cent blending and the demand is expected to soar in the coming years. 
Cane production needs to be enhanced to meet the ethanol requirement as well. The 
cogeneration potential in the country has been estimated at 5,500 MW, while the present 
installed capacity is just about half at 2,500 MW. Transgenic sugarcane can increase 
yields, reduce production costs, improve sugar quality and reduce the environmental 
impact of sugarcane cultivation. But, Each transgenic event must be analysed 
separately, because the impact (benefit and risk) of each trait will be different. Strong 
and reliable regulatory agencies are needed.

Chapter – 6: Seed Scenario 
6.1 
The normal practice in sugarcane growing States of country is to use commercial crop of 
sugarcane for seed purposes. Sugarcane is vegetatively propagated and required huge 
quantity of seed. The accounting of different classes of sugarcane seed i.e. breeder, 
foundation and certified are not being maintained by the different sugarcane growing 
States therefore the exact quantum of certified seed distributed by different agencies in 
major sugarcane growing states could not be assessed. The important cane seed 
production advanced technologies are available as under: 
6.2 
Tissue culture 
The tissue culture technique in sugarcane can be used for rapid multiplication of 
newly developed high yielding, high sugar, disease resistant varieties and rejuvenation 
of outstanding varieties under cultivation. The vegetative propagation of sugarcane 
through seed cane cuttings is cumbersome requiring larger quantities of vegetative seed 
material and seed multiplication rate is too low, needing about ten years for a new 
variety to be released for cultivation and cover larger areas in the field subsequently. 
With tissue culture technique, it is possible to release a variety within five years and 
propagate it quickly in the field. The productivity of the important varieties can also be 
maintained and improved for their longer life span in the field. The micro propagation 
technique used in this technology has the following advantages: 
 Production of true to type plantlets 
 rapid multiplication 
 independent of seasonal constraints 
 maintaining and improving the productivity of outstanding varieties in the field 
 production of disease free planting material from apical meristem 
 
The tissue culture technique has the following important components: 
i. 
Taking of spindle explants/Apical meristem from moist hot air treated seed cane 
crop of six to eight months age. 
ii. 
Media preparation 
iii. Inoculation 
iv. Multiplication of cultures 
v. 
In vitro rooting 
vi. Pre hardening 
vii. Transfer of plantlet from laboratory to Polybags 
viii. Hardening 
ix. Transplanting in the field 
 
6.3 
Polythene Bag Technology 
 
In this technique, fertile soil is filled in one kg. Polythene bags, small holes made 
in the bottom portion of polythene bag for aeration, single bud cuttings made from top 
one third portion of seed cane stalk, planted horizontally with bud position upward in top

one fourth soil portion and covered with thin soil layer followed by applying water with a 
watering cane. Alternatively, polythene bags are placed in a ploughed up field plot and 
irrigation water applied through surface irrigation. In this technique, the germination is 
almost 95% while in direct vegetative seed cane planting in the field, the germination 
hardly 40-50%. These pre germinated shoots in polybags are ready for transplanting in 
the field 30 days after planting by which time they attain 4-5 leaf stage. The poly cover 
is removed with a blade at the time of transplanting and the plantlets along with the earth 
ball placed in a mini pit made in the furrow and filled with soil and irrigation water 
applied. With this technique, only 20 qtl. seed is sufficient to transplant one hectare area 
while in normal direct sett planting about 75 qtl. seed is required. Therefore, there is 
significant saving of seed cane with this technique. This technique has particularly been 
found very useful for quick multiplication of seed of new promising varieties, replanting of 
ratoons and filling of gaps. It is also useful for late planting of sugarcane after wheat 
harvesting in April-May. 
 
6.4 
Raising of seedlings through bud chip: 
Production of sugarcane seed with high quality utilizing low cost technologies is 
the need of the hour. Transplanting of settlings raised in polybags offers great 
advantages in sugarcane seed production. Nursery raised from sugarcane bud chips 
and planting them in main field was found to be more economical than traditional 
methods. At Sugarcane Breeding Institute, an improved manually operated Bud 
Chipping Machine was fabricated. A high tension steel blade is used to scoop the bud as 
chips from a horizontally fed cane. Techniques for making bud chips, their storability, 
transport, raising the seedlings in polythene bag as well as their survival and 
establishment on a suitable medium were standardized. Bud chips could be taken using 
Bud Chipping Machine, treated with pesticide solution and transported to the destination 
for seed production. 
 
6.5 
Spaced transplanting technology: 
The technology as described by Srivastava et. al. (1981) consist of transplanting 
of nursery raised settlings. Settling are raised by planting of single bud set in nursery 
about one month before transplanting in the main field. About 2 tonnes of cane seed are 
required to obtain settlings for transplanting in one hectare of field. Apart from above 
conventional method of cane seed production is very popular through out India.

Chapter 7: Improved crop production practices 
7.1 
Major crop sequences/ rotations followed in various states and suggestion crop 
sequences by SAUs/ ICAR 
 Table: Prominent sugarcane based cropping system in tropical and subtropical regions 
of the country recommended. 
Sub tropical 
Tropical region 
Paddy- Autumn Sugarcane-ratoon-wheat 
Bajra-Sugarcane(pre-seasonal)-Ratoon- 
wheat 
Greengram- Autumn Sugarcane-ratoon-wheat 
Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- Finger millet 
Maiz- Autumn Sugarcane-ratoon-wheat 
Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- Wheat 
Kharif Crops-Potato-Spring Sugarcane-ratoon-
Wheat 
Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- gingelly 
Kharif Crops-Mustard-Spring Sugarcane-
ratoon-Wheat 
Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- urd. 
Kharif Crops-Pea/Coriander-Spring 
Sugarcane-ratoon-Wheat 
Cotton-Sugarcane-Ratoon–wheat 
Kharif Crops-Wheat-late Planted Sugarcane-
ratoon-Wheat 
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Kharif rice-Winter rice. 
 
 
 7.2 
State and season wise time of sowing and harvesting: 
Sugarcane take generally one year to mature in sub tropical states (U.P., Punjab, 
Haryana, Bihar etc.) called “Eksali” however in some tropical states it matures in 18 
months (Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra etc.) called “Adsali”. In India, the 
planting seasons of sugarcane in different States is given at Annexure-XX. 
 
7.3 
Planting of sugarcane crop: 
 (i) Different season and method of planting: Sugarcane can be planted as per the 
recommendation for the region i.e. Autumn Planting (15 Sept. to Oct.) and Spring 
Planting (Feb. to March). Improved method of planting should be adopted like, 
deep furrow, trench methods, ring pit method and paired row method instead of 
furrow system. 
 (ii) Land preparation by use of different technologies like RCT: 
 
7.4 
Resource Conservation Technology (RCT) in Sugarcane: 
Application of nitrogen fixing (Azospirillum and Gluconacetobacter) and 
phosphate solubilizing (Phosphobacteria) bio-fertilizers were found to reduce the 
requirement of chemical fertilizers to the extent of 25%. Reduction in the dose of 
chemical fertilizers reduces soil degradation (Source: http://www.sugarcane.res.in). 
Trash mulching of dry leaves, drip irrigation for water saving and mechanization through 
Ratoon management device (RMD), sugarcane cutter planter, trench opener, power 
weeder etc. are successfully using for saving for man power as well as time.

7.5 Seeding technologies –seed rate, distance, depth, plant population 
Seed rate: 
 
Seed rate in sugarcane varies from region to region. Generally higher seed rate 
are used in north western India (Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan) because of the lower 
germination percent and also adverse climatic condition (very hot weather with 
desiccating winds) during tillering phase. A northern region seed rate generally varies 
from 40,000 to 60,000 three budded setts per hectares while in southern region it range 
between 25,000 to 40,000 three budded setts. 
 
Row spacing: 
 
Effect of row spacing from 45 to 120 cm has been tried on growth, yield and quality 
of sugarcane. Optimum inter rows spacing range between 60-100 cm under different 
situation and location. 
 
Optimum seed rate and row spacing for sugarcane in different states in India 
S.No.
State 
Seed rate (3 
buded sett 
(000/ha) 
Row spacing 
(cm) 
Sub-tropical region 

Uttar Pradesh 
 
 
 
Timely planting

Late Planting

Bihar 

75-90 
 
Punjab 

60-75 
 
Haryana 
75 (2 budded) 
60-75 
 
Rajasthan 
40-45 
75-90 
 
Madhya Pradesh 

Assam 
37-42 

West Bengal 

Tropical
 
Maharashtra 

90-100 
 
Andhra Pradesh 

80-90 
 
Karnataka 

Gujrat 

Tamilnadu 

Orissa 
37-40 

Kerala 
35-40 

 Source: Sugarcane Production technology in India by Dr. R. S. Verma 
 
Depth: 
 
About 80% of the sugarcane roots go up to a depth 60 cm. Hence deep ploughing 
of sugarcane fields is necessary. Initially one or two deep ploughings with tractor drawn 
disc plough or mould board plough or animal drawn mould board plough have to be done

at least to a depth of 30 cm. This has to be followed by ploughing with other light tillage 
implements. 
7.6 
Fertilizer management – recommended dose for different ecologies, micro 
nutrients, organic manure, application method 
 
An average crop of sugarcane yielding 100 t/ha removes 208kg of N, 53kg of P, 
280kg of K, 30 kg of Sulphur, 3.4kg of iron, 1.2 kg of manganese, 0.6 kg of copper 
respectively from the soil. Hence, soil has to be replenished to maintain the productivity of 
sugarcane with the said quantities of nutrients. 
Micro nutrient management 
If the soil test value is below the critical value, apply sulphate form of Zn, Cu, Fe 
and Mn through soil application and foliar spray (The total concentration of salt should be 
0.5% for young crop and 2.5% for a grown up crop). 
Nutrient concentration in soil (for sugarcane) 
Nutrient 
 
 
 
Critical levels 
(i) Fe (non-calcareous soil) 
 4.2 ppm 
(ii) Fe (calcareous soil) 
 6.3 ppm 
(iii) Zn (Loamy soils) 
 
 1.2 ppm 
(iv) Zn (Clay soils) 
 
 2.0 ppm 
(v) Mn 
 
 2.0 ppm 
(vi) Cu 
 
 1.2 ppm 
(vii) Hot water soluble-B 
 0.44 ppm 
 
Organic matter helps in better soil structure formation and provides the most 
favourable air and water regimes. It is the source of plant nutrients including micro-
nutrients, which are liberated in available form during mineralization. It increases the 
water holding capacity, buffer and exchange capacity and microbial activity of the soils. 
Hence soil organic matter is considered as an elixir of soil productivity. The 
recommended dose of bio-fertilizers for sugarcane crop is 10-12 kg/ha Acetobector, 
Azotobector, Azospirillum (or Gluconacetobacter) and PSB are the major bio fertilizers 
which are being used in Sugarcane crop. 
 
7.7 
Water management: application and conservation methods, their water use 
efficiency, water requirement of crops, critical stages for irrigation and probable 
losses if not applied: 
 
In tropical area, irrigations are to be given once in 7 days during germination 
phase (1 –35 days after planting), once in 10 days during tillering phase (36 – 100 days 
after planting), again once in 7 days during grand growth phase (101 – 270 days after 
planting) and once in 15 days during maturity phase (271 days after planting up to 
harvest) adjusting it to the rain fall pattern of the area. About 30 to 40 irrigations are 
needed. Sugarcane is a high water requirement crop. About 250 tonnes of water is 
needed to produce one tonne of sugarcane. Methods like alternate furrow irrigation, drip 
irrigation and trash mulching could be of use to economize irrigation water during water

scarcity periods. Foliar spraying of a solution containing 2.5% urea and 2.5% muriate of 
potash 3 or 4 times at fortnightly intervals during drought periods would help to reduce 
the impact of drought on the crop (Source: http://sugarcane.res.in) 
 
7.8 
Water requirement and applying irrigation at critical stages of growth: 
As mentioned earlier, critical stages are those during which sugarcane is affected 
severely due to water stress and the loss cannot be restituted by adequate water supply 
at later stages. These stages are: sprouting (germination), formative stage or tillering, 
ripening and initiation of sprouting in ratoons. In case of limited water availability, one 
may sustain sugarcane productivity by irrigating at critical stages of growth. (Sustaining 
sugarcane productivity under depleting water resources: (Current Sc 748 IENCE, Vol. 
101, No. 6, 25 September 2011 by Ashok K. Shrivastava, Arun K. Srivastava and Sushil 
Solomon are in the Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow 226 002, India.) 
 
Water requirement (WR) in various sugarcane- growing states of India 
State 
WR (ha-cm)
Tropical India 
Andhra Pradesh 
160–170 
Tamil Nadu 

Karnataka 
200–240 
Maharashtra 
 
(i) Plant cane (seasonal) 

(ii) Plant cane (pre-seasonal) 

(iii) Plant cane (Adsali) 

(iv) Ratoon 

Madhya Pradesh 

Subtropical India
 
Bihar 

Uttar Pradesh 
160–180 
Punjab 
170–180 
 
Effect of irrigation methods on sugarcane yield, water-saving and water-use efficiency: 
Agronomi
c measure 
No. of 
demonstratio
ns 
Cane yield (t ha–1) 
Water applied 
(cm) 
IWUE (kg ha–1 cm)
D 
FP 
Increa
se (%) 
D 
FP
Savin
g (%) 
D
FP
Increa
se (%) 
TM

75.9
54.9 38.2
42.5
59.6
28.7
1786.4
921.5
93.9 
SF

82.8
63.7 30.0
48.7
63.9
31.2
1700.2
996.2
90.6 
ICGS 

82.8
63.4 30.6
46.0
55.3
16.81 
1800.0
1146.5
57.0 
D, Demonstration; FP, Farmer’s practice; IWUE, Irrigation water use efficiency; TM, 
Trash mulching; SF, Skip-furrow method of irrigation; ICGS, Irrigation at critical growth 
stages 
Source: (Sustaining sugarcane productivity under depleting water resources: Current Sc 
748 IENCE, Vol. 101, No. 6, 25 September 2011 by Ashok K. Shrivastava, Arun K.

Srivastava and Sushil Solomon are in the Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, 
Lucknow 226 002, India.) 
 
7.9 
Weed Management – important weed flora, herbicides recommended with dose 
application time and different methods (mechanical, biological etc.) 
 
In sugarcane, weeds have been estimated to cause 12 to 72 % reduction in cane 
yield depending upon the severity of infestation. The nature of weed problem in 
sugarcane cultivation is quite different from other field crops because of the following 
reasons: 
 
Sugarcane is planted with relatively wider row spacing. 
The sugarcane growth is very slow in the initial stages. It takes about 30 – 45 days 
to complete germination and another 60-75 days for developing full canopy cover. 
The crop is grown under abundant water and nutrient supply conditions. 
 In ratoon crop very little preparatory tillage is taken up hence weeds that have 
established in the plant crop tend to flourish well. 
The major weeds are Sedges- Cyprus rotundus; Grasses-Cynodon dactylon, 
Sorghum helepense, Panicum spp, Dactylocternium aegyptium, Broad leaved weeds – 
Chenapodium album, Convolvulus arvensis L., Amaranthus viridis L., Portulaca 
oleraceae L., Commelina bengalensis L., Trianthema portulacastrum L. etc. 
 
Integrated weed management 
Complete weed control cannot be achieved by using any one method. To have 
more dependable, economical and desirable weed control without environmental 
problems, it is advisable to have a proper combination of agronomical, cropping, 
rotational and biological methods with supplemental use of herbicides. By continuous 
use of herbicides, in addition to the residual problem there is every possibility of a major 
weed becoming a problematic one. Several of the effective herbicides are either non-
available or prohibitively priced and therefore their use is restricted. An integrated 
approach wherein only supplemental use of herbicide is resorted to is highly desirable. 
Integrated weed management involves use of all feasible control measures such as 
mechanical, cultural, cropping, biological and chemical, in proper combination at 
different stages of weed and crop growth to get the most practical and economical 
results. 
 
Mechanical control 
- 
In integrated weed management, mechanical and cultural methods assume great 
importance. The most important aspect of weed management is checking the weed 
seed dispersal. This calls for destroying weeds before they flower and set seeds. 
Mechanical destruction is an effective measure. 
- 
Keeping the irrigation channels clean helps in checking transport and dispersal of 
weed seeds. A thorough tillage, besides providing a good seedbed to the sugarcane 
crop, also destroys weeds.

Agronomic practices 
Growing the crop with proper agronomic practices will make the crop more 
competitive. Maintaining adequate crop population and application of optimum 
doses of nutrients are important. 
In ratoon sugarcanes, gaps favour weed growth. An adequate ratoon population 
must be achieved by stubble shaving, off barring and gap filling. 
 
Pre-emergence herbicide 
Use of a pre-emergence herbicide is essential to control the weeds during the 
germination phase of the crop. 
Post-Emergence Management of Parasitic weed Striga asiatica in Sugarcane is new 
practice developed by TNAU in which pre-emergence application of atrazine 
1.0kg/ha on third day after planting + hand weeding on 45 DAP with an earthing up 
on 60 DAP combined with post-emergence spraying of 2,4-D sodium salt 5g/litre 
(0.5%) + urea 20g / litre (2%) on 90 DAP for complete control is adopted. So that 
complete control of parasitic weed Striga Asiatica is ensured. Seed production by 
the weed is also avoided. This is an environmentally safe technology. 
Hoeing earthing up and hand weeding 
Hoeing the inter rows using a ridger would help control weeds besides being able to 
earth up the cane rows. Hand weeding of the weeds in the cane rows is still 
necessary. 
Earthing-up operation is also known as "hilling-up". This operation is carried out in 
two or three stages. The first earthing-up operation is known partial earthing-up and 
the second/third operation is known as "full earthing-up". The partial earthing-up is 
done at 45 days after planting. While doing partial earthing-up, the furrow in which 
the cane row is present gets partially filled-up. Full earthing-up is done after 120 
days after planting coinciding with the peak tiller population stage. During full 
earthing-up the soil from the ridge in between is fully removed and placed near the 
cane on either side. This operation converts the furrows into ridges and ridges into 
furrows. This operation could be done either manually or by using a bullock-
drawn/tractor drawn furrower depending upon the spacing adopted. One more 
earthing-up after cane population is stabilized at 180 DAP may be helpful in 
preventing lodging and water shoots formation. It also improves aeration and helps 
to control weeds. 
 
Irrigation 
Avoiding excess irrigation reduces the build up of weeds and damage to the soil. 
 
Mulching 
- Sugarcane trash can be profitably utilised for moisture conservation, weed control 
and to enrich organic matter status. Trash mulch reduces weed growth. 
- Artificial mulches have been used for intercepting sun-light reaching the soil surface 
and thus starve out weed seedling as they emerge. Uniform spread of 5 to 10 cm

thick trash blanket in-between the rows, as also in the inter-plant spaces help in 
suppressing weeds. The trash keeps all weeds suppressed and the fields remain 
almost free from weeds. It is necessary to give a thorough hoeing and weeding in 
the field before spreading the trash, particularly if the field has been weedy. In 
places, where obnoxious grass weeds are in abundance the trash cover has to be a 
little thicker, say 10 cm to 15 cm thick. This is indeed a very potent and useful way 
of suppressing weeds in sugarcane fields. Beside weed control, trash mulching 
saves water, labour and costs, and gives higher yields of cane. Trash-mulched plots 
are remarkably easy on irrigation. Bagasse, paddy husk, hay, straw, etc. can also be 
used as mulching material. Spreading the black polythene film (Solarization) in 
interspaces 
suppresses 
the 
growth 
of 
weeds 
and 
conserves 
soil 
moisture.Intercropping 
- 
In sugarcane, black gram, green gram, soybean, sunflower, groundnut etc. can be 
grown as intercrops, and they help in smothering weeds. 
 
Crop rotation 
- 
Rotating sugarcane with other crop reduces the incidence of certain weed species, 
for example, puddling and growing paddy helps in reducing the incidence of several 
grass and broad leaved weeds. 
 
Weed Management in Pure Crop of Sugarcane 
i. 
Spray Atrazine 2 kg or Oxyflurofen 750 ml/ha mixed in 500 ltr. of water as pre 
emergence herbicide on the 3rd day of planting, using deflector or fan type nozzle. 
ii. 
If pre-emergence spray is not carried out, go in for post-emergence spray of 
Grammaxone 2.5 litre + 2,4-D sodium salt 2.5 kg/ha in 500 litre of water on 21st 
day of planting. 
iii. If the parasitic weed striga is a problem, post-emergence application of 2,4-D 
sodium salt @ 1.25 kg/ha in 500 litre of water/ha may be done. 2, 4-D spraying 
should be avoided when neighbouring crop is cotton or bhendi. 
iv. Apply 20% urea also for the control of striga as direct spray. 
v. 
Pre- plant application of glyphosate at 2.0 kg ha-1 along with 2% ammonium 
sulphate at 21 days before planting of sugarcane followed by post emergence 
direct spraying of glyphosate at 2.0 kg ha-1 along with 2% ammonium sulphate 
with a special hood on 30 DAP suppressed the nut sedges (Cyperus rotundas) and 
provided weed free environment. 
vi. If herbicide is not applied work the junior-hoe along the ridges on 25, 55 and 85 
days after planting for removal of weeds and proper stirring. 
vii. Remove the weeds along the furrows with hand hoe. Otherwise operate power 
tiller fitted with tynes for intercultivation. 
 
Weed management in Sugarcane intercropping system 
Premergence application of Thiobencarb @ 1.25 kg ai/ha under intercropping 
system in Sugarcane with Soybean, blackgram or groundnut gives effective weed 
control.

7.10 
Plant protection – important insects pests and diseases and their effect on yield 
loss, chemical, biological and cultural control measures: 
 
Sugarcane is liable to be attacked by a number of insect pests and diseases. 
According to an estimate, sugarcane production declines by 20.0 and 19.0 % by insect 
pests and diseases respectively. To increase the crop productivity, management of 
insect-pest and diseases is of great significance. Due to diversity in agro-ecological 
conditions the importance of insect pests and disease varies and therefore, 
management strategy should be adopted accordingly. 
 
 
Sugarcane is infested by about 288 insects of which nearly two dozen causes 
heavy losses to the quality as well as quantity of the crop. The scenario of insect pests 
and diseases varies in sub-tropical and tropical belt of sugarcane. Top borer and stalk 
borer are found pre-dominantly in sub-tropical areas whereas internodes borer and early 
shoot borer and among disease rust & eye spot are prevalent in tropical region. The 
extent of losses due to different insect & pests in India. Management schedule for insect 
pests of sugarcane for subtropical India is given at Annexure-XXI. Management 
schedule for insect pests like Borers (stem, shoot and internode), scale insect, termites, 
shoot borer, root borer, thrips, White grubs, woolly aphid, White fly, snail, rodents etc. of 
sugarcane for Subtropical & Tropical India is given at Annexure-XXII & Annexure 
XXIII. Important diseases like Red rot, smut, wilt and grassy shoot and mosaic etc. of 
sugarcane and their management is given at Annexure-XXIV. 
7.11 
Harvesting: 
 
Harvesting and collection of cane should be either mechanical or manual. It has 
been found that when cane is harvested and gathered mechanically, by combined 
harvester, or manually cut and collected and then grab loaded into large trucks/ tractor 
trolley. 
Time of harvest: As far as possible harvesting should be carried out avoiding extremes 
of weather and within a short space of time, in order to obtain an even stand of ratoon 
cane. When crop is harvested in hot dry months, stubble and the soil tend to dry up 
quickly. Sprouting would be low due to drying up of the stubble and buds. Some times, 
immediately after ratooning, there may be a short wet spell followed by a long dry period, 
which will again lead to ratoon failure, as the shoot mortality will be high in the long dry 
period. In sub tropical of India, it has been shown that spring harvested plant crop- 
would result in a better ratoon then that obtained by harvesting in the autumn period. It 
has been observed that ratooning during winter months would lead to failure in axillary 
bud sprouting causing poor stands and much yield loss (Agrawal and Srivastava, 1983; 
Misra and Mathur, 1986; Yadav, 1993). In subtropical India, rationing of cane from mid 
January through February is preferred in order to obtain a high shoot population 
(Srivatava et al. 1985). Mishra and Mathur, 1991 have noted the influence of harvest 
time and fertility level of soils on multiple rationing of sugarcane in India. Although the 
optimum temperature range for the growth and sprouting of sugarcane is 26-30oC and 
subtropical areas, because of the poor sprouting depth occurs in low temperature

periods, most of the agro-technologies is concerned the establishment of high 
population density of millable stocks at maturity in the plant crop. 
Harvesting technique: Harvesting of vegetative stocks, automatically initiates the 
regeneration of ratoon crop, with the removal of apical dominance, the stable is piece is 
now free to sprout its axillary buds from top downwards. In the manual system of 
harvesting using a straight blade knife, generally 5-10 cm piece of stable is left above 
the ground. The sugarcane crop can be cut at the ground level, then axillary buds which 
are below the ground level are forced to sprout and ratooning occurs with a well 
established root system which will be able to withstand wind as well exploit the total 
ground area. It has been found that knife with a curved blade in much superior to 
straight knife in harvesting sugarcane sticks in flush with the ground (Meemeduma, 
1983). 
 
7.12 
Use and recommendation of farm implements and machines used for different 
operations: 
Mechanization in Sugarcane Cultivation 
In the competitive involvement, which is fast enveloping all the operations, the 
effectiveness of human resources will be the cutting edge for sustaining the productivity. 
Mechanization in Indian agriculture has proceeded along with the time tested two 
pronged approach based on improved equipments and enhance power supply. 
However, compared to the mechanization of western agriculture which was motivated by 
the need to substitute human labour and draught animal with mechanical prime movers, 
to maintain the socially desirable mix of human labours, draught animal power and 
mechanical power. Indian agriculture, powered by about 185 million agriculture workers, 
73 million draught animals and 3 million tractors, reflect the unique Indian approach to 
mechanization. The analysis of impact of mechanization has shown that the emphasis 
on timeliness, precision and general improvement in the quality of work, mechanization 
has undoubtedly contributed to increase the yield, cropping intensity and total production 
and cost effectively. These machines have been developed for different farm operations 
such as tillage, seed bed preparation, sowing and planting, weeding and inter culture 
operations, irrigations, plant protection and harvesting etc. Sugarcane harvester is 
mainly using for harvesting of sugarcane in tropical states. 
 
 
 
Machinery adopted for mechanical sugarcane cultivation in India 
Animal drawn sugarcane planter: This equipment plants pre-cut sugarcane sett that 
are manually metered. It has a 3 wheeled fore-carriage and a trailed implement attached 
behind it. 
Tractor drawn mustard Drill attachment to semi automatic sugarcane planter: It is 
an attachment to tractor mounted IISR semi-automatic sugarcane planter for sowing 
mustard and sugarcane, developed by IISR, Lucknow. 
Power operated sugarcane sett cutting machine: It is a power-operated machine for 
cutting sugarcane setts for planting developed at IISR, Lucknow.

Tractor drawn semi automatic sugarcane planter: It is a tractor mounted implement 
suitable for planting sugarcane setts and application of granular fertilizer developed by 
IISR Lucknow. 
Tractor drawn sugarcane cutter planter with discs: It is a tractor mounted implement 
suitable for cutting and planting sugarcane setts and application of granular fertilizer in 
single operation The machine accepts whole cane for planting and has been developed 
by IISR, Lucknow. 
Tractor mounted ridger type sugarcane cutter planter: It is a tractor mounted 
implement suitable for cutting and planting sugarcane setts and application of granular 
fertilizer in single operation. The machine accepts whole cane for planting. This 
implement is developed at IISR, Lucknow. 
Ring pit digger: In order to facilitate the digging operation, a tractor drawn pit digger is 
developed at IISR, Lucknow in 1987. The equipment can dig two pits at a time. 
Ratoon management device (RMD): It is the device for ratoon management and 
developed by IISR, Lucknow. It works as stable saving, sub-soiler and ridge making etc. 
Animal drawn sugarcane earthing hoe: It is an animal drawn implement suitable for 
earthing operation of sugarcane crop having row spacing of 90 cm to 120 cm. This 
implement is developed at MPKV, Pune during 1987-95. 
Sprayers and dusters adopted for sugarcane: 1. Wide swath spray boom for tall 
Crop, 2. Self propelled boom sprayer, 3. Bucket type sprayer, 4. Knapsack Sprayer 
Dusters: 1. Bellow typed dusters, 2. Shoulder carried hand operated rotary duster, 3. 
Sigma dusters, 4. Rotary type hand and power duster 
Aerated Steam Therapy: Sugarcane crop often becomes susceptible to sett born 
diseases. The following methods are used to protect the sett from sett born diseases. 
i) Hot Water Treatment: Cane is treated with hot water at 50 o C for 2 hours. 
ii) Hot Air Treatment: Cane is treated with hot air at 54 oC with high humidity for 4 
hours. 
Tractor mounted 2 row sugarcane stubble shaver: This implement is developed by 
IISR, Lucknow. The stubble shaver consists of a rotary blade operated by tractor PTO. 
Use of this equipment results in 15 per cent increase in yield compared to conventional 
method. 
 
Approximate manufacturer cost (at IISR, Lucknow) of agriculture equipments used 
in sugarcane cultivation 
S.
No. 
Name of the equipment 
Appox cost 
(Rs.) 

Culti Harrow
40000

Cane Manager 
28000
A. Furrower with Frame
19600
B. Tynes with Frame
15740

Trencher
13800

Paired Row Sugarcane Planter 
54700

RBS Cane planter
115000 

Ratoon Management Device 
117000 

Detrasher 
55000

Harvester 
100000 

Ratoon Manager
82300

Sugarcane Planters
55000-92300

Three Row Cane Planter 
61500
Source: IISR, Lucknow 
7.13 
Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative (SSI) 
The ICRISAT-WWF project has designed the Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative, 
(SSI) which is a combination of cane planting innovations and water saving practices 
that have great potential for not only meeting the growing demands of sugar sector 
players looking for increased revenues and profitability, but also for the bigger picture of 
improved natural resource management, reduced environmental footprints and improved 
livelihoods by means of technologies that are appropriate and effective at household 
farm level. Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative is a method of sugarcane production that 
involves the use of less seeds, less water and optimum utilization of fertilizers and land 
to achieve more yields. Driven by farmers, SSI is an alternative to conventional seed, 
water and space intensive sugarcane cultivation. 
 
The major principles that govern SSI are: 
• Raising nursery using single budded chips. 
• Transplanting young seedlings (25-35 days old). 
• Maintaining wide spacing (5X2 feet) in the main field. 
• Providing sufficient moisture and avoiding inundation of water. 
• Encouraging organic method of nutrient and plant protection measures. 
• Practicing intercropping for effective utilization of land.

Raising nursery using single budded chips 
In the conventional method, 2-3 budded sugarcane setts are used for planting. In 
SSI, single budded chips, carefully removed from healthy canes are used for raising 
nursery. The selected buds are placed in trays filled with coco-pith (coconut coir waste) 
to raise the seedlings. By raising nursery, high percentage of germination can be 
achieved within a week depending on the agro climatic conditions. 
 
 
The procedure given below is to be followed for the selection of healthy buds: 
Select healthy canes of 7 to 9 months old which have good internode length (7 to 8 
inches) and girth. 
Observe and avoid canes with disease infestation like fungus growth, spots etc. 
Cut the required quantity of canes (refer table 2). Farmers who are unable to go for 
immediate chipping of buds may keep the cut canes for about a week under 
shade. 
Remove buds from the selected canes using an implement called Bud Chipper (as 
shown in the picture). The Bud Chipper comprises a handle and a cutting blade 
fixed on a wooden plank. 
Keep the cane on the plank and adjust it in such a way that a single bud is placed 
exactly below the cutting blade. When the handle is pressed, single bud chip 
comes off the cane. 
Large number of buds (about 150/hr) can easily be chipped off in this way in a 
short period of time. 
The chipped buds are to be treated with organic or chemical solutions. 
Transplanting young seedlings 
The young seedlings raised in the nursery are transplanted to the main field at 
the age of 25 – 35 days. It is important to note here that this one month growth of 
seedlings achieved under SSI method cannot be achieved even after two months in 
conventional method.

Transplanting at wider spacing 
In conventional methods, the distance between two rows is 45 to 75 cm (1.5-2.5 ft), and 
16,000 three budded setts (48,000 buds) are directly planted in the soil to achieve normal 
population of 44,000 canes per acre. But unfortunately, only 25,000 millable canes are achieved 
at the end. On the other hand, in the SSI method of sugarcane cultivation, wide spacing of 5X2 
feet maintained in the main field leads to 45,000 to 55,000 millable canes because of more 
tillering. So, wider spacing in SSI cultivation not only reduces the seed usage from 16,000 three 
budded setts to 4,000 to 5,000 single buds, but most importantly it also supports easy air and 
sunlight penetration in the crop canopy for better and healthy cane growth.

Water management 
In SSI water management, is emphasized so that 
sufficient moisture is provided rather than 
inundating the field. Measures like raising of 
nursery, 
adopting 
furrow/alternate 
furrow 
irrigation, application of water through drip 
irrigation etc should be followed. It saves water 
by 40%. 
 
Organic method of cultivation
The SSI method discourages high application of 
chemical fertilizers, use of pesticides and 
weedicides. Farmers should use more organic 
manures, bio-fertilizers and follow biocontrol 
measures. The sudden switch over to organic 
cultivation is not advisable. Instead, a gradual 
reduction of inorganic and adoption of organic 
methods can be tried by framers for long term 
benefits. 
Pit System of Planting 
In this method, the seedlings are planted in circular pits dug out with specific 
diameters and distances. The circular pits of 3 ft or 5 ft diameter are dug out to a depth 
of 1.5 to 2 ft. Row to row spacing is maintained at 7 ft and pit to pit spacing is 
maintained at 6 ft. At these spacing’s, about 1050 to 1150 (with 3 ft diameter) or 500 to 
550 (with 5 ft diameter) pits can be made per acre. The pits are then filled with loose dug 
out soil, FYM or press mud leaving about 1 ft space at the top. Two to four seedlings per 
pit with 3 ft diameter and 6 to 8 seedlings per pit with 5 ft diameter can be planted close 
to the edge and covered with soil to a thickness of 5 cm. About 2000 to 4000 seedlings 
are sufficient per acre, saving the seed cost further for a farmer. All other crop 
management practices can be followed as practiced in normal method. 
 
Following are the benefits of pit methods: 
• In the subtropics and in the tropical part of India, about 25-50 % higher yields were 
obtained. 
• Growth of the crop will be vigorous and the maturity will also be earlier compared to 
the normal method.

• In case of drip irrigation, nutrition supplied through drip fertigation which will helps in 
faster crop growth. 
• It allows a farmer to pay better attention to the crops or crop pits. 
• It gives better ratoon crops and is useful under saline soils and saline water irrigated 
conditions. 
• All the shoots will be of the same age, so there is uniform growth and sugar yield. 
• The seedlings are placed at a depth and therefore would moist, hence, in case of 
drought, or non-availability of water, the yields will not get affected. 
 
 
 
Ratoon Management in Sugarcane 
It is the most commonly followed and important practice in sugarcane cultivation. 
In ratoon crops, there is a saving in cost of cultivation in terms of land preparation, seed 
canes, etc. If ratoons are well maintained, they give high yields. But, for a better ratoon 
crop, a better plant crop is necessary. Within a week after harvesting the plant 
crop, ratoon management practices like stubble shaving, off baring, gap filling etc., 
should be initiated. 
Stubble shaving 
• The stubbles should be cut using a very sharp blade just above ground level. 
• It helps the healthy underground buds to sprout and establish a deeper root system. 
• The deeper root system facilitates optimum utilization of the nutrients and moisture 
available in the lower soil layers and provides good support for growth of the ratoon 
crop. 
 
Off baring 
• It is an operation wherein the ridges are broken or cut on either side using a plough. 
• This will loosen the soil to develop better root system and thereby better absorption 
of nutrients and water.

Gap filling 
• If there are no cane clumps for a distance of more than 60 cms or so, it can be 
considered as a gap. Gap filling can be done using the seedlings raised in the 
nursery. 
• Clumps with excess sprouting can be uprooted, cut into quarters and planted in the 
gaps. 
 
Row thinning 
In areas where close spaced plantings are followed, entire canes of alternate 
rows can be removed. This can be done by running a plough along the sides of the 
alternate ridges selected for removal of the cane rows. This will break or loosen the 
ridges and facilitate easy lifting and removal of the plants. While removing the canes, 
gap filling in the adjacent rows can be done. This practice of removing alternate rows of 
canes will increase the space between the rows and thus facilitate sprouting of more 
tillers because of optimum utilization of the available nutrients and sunlight. 
 
Fertilizer application 
• Entire dose of phosphorous, one-third each of nitrogen and potassium as 
recommended for plant crops can also be applied to ratoon crops. The suggested 
dose should be applied soon after stubble shaving and off barring, and covered with 
soil. 
• The remaining dose of nitrogen and potassium can be top dressed in equal splits 
around 30th and 60th days. 
 
Besides the above mentioned practices, all the other crop management practices 
like irrigation, weeding and earthing up should be continued and followed as done for 
plant crops. Ratoon crops mature one month prior to the plant crops. In the conventional 
method of sugarcane cultivation, ratoon crops are maintained for only a maximum of two 
seasons but farmers practicing SSI methods maybe able to achieve 5 to 6 ratoon crops.

Chapter 8: Cropping system 
Sugarcane prevailing cropping system in India: 
Cropping system for Sub tropical 
Cropping system for Tropical region
Paddy- Autumn Sugarcane-ratoon-wheat 
Bajra-Sugarcane(pre-seasonal)-Ratoon- 
wheat 
Greengram- Autumn Sugarcane-ratoon-
wheat 
Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- Finger millet 
Maiz- Autumn Sugarcane-ratoon-wheat 
Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- Wheat 
Kharif Crops-Potato-Spring Sugarcane-
ratoon-Wheat 
Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- gingelly 
Kharif Crops-Mustard-Spring Sugarcane-
ratoon-Wheat 
Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- urd. 
Kharif Crops-Pea/Coriander-Spring 
Sugarcane-ratoon-Wheat 
Cotton-Sugarcane-Ratoon–wheat
Kharif Crops-Wheat-late Planted Sugarcane-
ratoon-Wheat 
Sugarcane-Ratoon-Kharif rice-Winter rice. 
 
 
The problem poses by the prevalent cropping systems is mainly depletion of ground water, 
due to continuous adoption of cropping system having no time for summer ploughing resulted in 
incidence of white grub in sugarcane emerging as serious problem.

Chapter 9: Crop products 
 
9.1 
Products and by- products of Sugarcane 
 
Sugarcane based Sugar industry is one of the largest and important industry in 
tropical and sub tropical countries of the world. The Sugarcane plant offers a huge 
potential, not only as the sucrose of a very important food but also as a source of energy 
and valuable commercial products from fermentation and chemical synthesis. 
Sugarcane processing is focused on the production of cane sugar from sugarcane. 
Sugarcane is considered as one of the best converters of solar energy into biomass and 
Sugar. Sugarcane is a rich source of food (Sucrose, jiggery andsyrups), fiber (cellulose), 
fodder (green top, bagasse, molasses) fuel and chemicals (Bagasse molasses & 
alcohol). During the process of sugar production, the main by product of cane sugar 
industry are Bagasse, Molasses and Press mud. The other co products and by products 
of less commercial value are Green leaves, green tops, trash, Boiler ash and effluents 
generated by sugar industry and distillery. There are many other industries which are 
based on sugarcane by diversification and utilization of co-products and by products of 
the sugar industry, instead of merely depending on production of sugar. Thus the effort 
should be for integral utilization of sugarcane, its coproducts and by products to produce 
many value added products, to derive maximum benefits from sugarcane crop. 
 
 
9.2 
Bagasse based industries: 
Bagasse is a fibrous residue left over after the sugarcane is crushed in the milling 
plant of the sugar factories for extracting its juice. Bagasse consists of water, fiber and 
relative small quantity of soluble solids. The fibre content of bagasse (cellulose) is used 
in cellulosic industries like pulp plant, paper plant, particle boards industries, co 
generation unit using bagasse as a fuel, cattle feed from bagasse, cultivation of edible 
mushroom on bagasse, production of furfural from bagasse etc. 
 
9.3 
Molasses based industries: 
Molasses is another important by product of the sugar industry. It is the mother 
liquor left over after the crystallization of sucrose from which further quantity of sucrose 
can not be recovered economically. The yield of molasses per tone of cane may vary 
within a range of 2.2- 3.7%. Molasses contains about 30-35% of sugar and 15-20% of 
reducing sugar (Glucose and fructose) and thus the total sugar content of molasses is 
45-55%. It is by virtue of its total sugar content the molasses is a valuable raw material 
for the production of many value added products. The main products that cane be 
produced from molasses are (i) Distillery (ii) Acetic Acid (iii) Fuel Alcohal (iv) Bio gas 
from effluent treatment (v) Cattle feed (vi) Ethyl Alcohal (vii) Bakers yeast (viii) Lactic 
Acid (ix) Citric Acid (x) Glycerol (xi) Butanol- Acetone (xii) Monosodium Glutamate (xiii) 
Ephedrrinee Hydrochloride as Pharmaceutical use etc.

9.4 
Press mud based industries: 
Press mud is a rich source of organic carban and contains a good proportion of 
N, P, Ca, Fe & Mn. In early stage the disposal of press mud is posing a problem before 
the sugar factories not only related to the volume to be handled but also to its polluting 
effect and an increase in population of insects such as house flies etc. Now, due to 
technological advancement the press mud is largely utilized as a fertilizer and in the wax 
and compost industries. Uses of press mud are fertilizer, animal feed, Cane wax, Bio-
gas, steam generation cake and mud cake in building materials.

Chapter 10: Crop Development Programme 
10.1 Brief description on each important crop development proramme 
Since October 2000, the Crop oriented Centrally Sponsored Scheme being 
implemented in different States subsumed with Macro Management Mode on Agriculture 
(MMMA). The pattern of assistance has been 90:10 between GOI and State Govt. 
The main components continued to remain same as it was in the SUBACS with the 
flexibility to incorporate new components as per the requirement of the state. The 
main components of the scheme are: Field demonstration, IPM demonstration, Farmers 
Training, State level training, Distribution of implements (Manual/tractor drawn), Seed 
multiplication, MHAT Plant, Drip irrigation infrastructure, Bio-fertilizer distribution, 
Biological control etc. 
 
Components and pattern of Assistance in Sugarcane Development Programme: 
S.No 
Components/ 
interventions 
Unit 
Pattern of Assistance 

Demonstration of 
Technology 
0.5 ha. @ Rs. 7500/- per demo. 

Distribution of Farm 
Implementation 
i) Bullock/Manual Drawn @ 25% of the cost limited to 
Rs. 2500/- per unit. 
ii) Tractor/Power drawn @ 25% of the cost limited to 
Rs.15000/- 

Multiplication of Planting 
Materials(Cane sets) 
Ha. 
a) Foundation nursery @ 10% of the cost limited to 
Rs.4000/- per ha. 
b) Primary nursery @ 10% of the cost limited to 
Rs.2,000/- per ha. 

Training 
a) Farmers: 50 farmers for 2 days @ Rs.10000/- per 
training. 
b) State Level: 30 participants for 3 days @ Rs. 
20,000/- per training. 

Setting up of Moist heat 
treatment units for 
treatment of planting 
material by Farmer’s 
Association, Mills 
@ 50% of the cost per plant including generator, 
limited to Rs. 3,00,000/-. 

Supply of Drip irrigation 
Infrastructure 
Ha. 
@ 50% of the cost limited to Rs. 30,000/-. per ha. 

Setting up/Strengthing up 
a) Tissue Culture Lab 
b) Bio Agent Lab by SAU 
/ICAR Instt., Mills 
 
 
@ 25% of the cost limited to Rs. 10,00,000/-. per 
tissue culture lab or bio agent lab. 

Monitoring/Inspection/visit/ 
Preparation of reports, 
POL etc. as contingency 
Distt. 
Rs. 50,000/- lump sum per major sugarcane growing 
district.

Area specific intervention 
 
10% of allocation 
 
NEW COMPONENTS

Assistance for Boring of 
Tubewells/pumpsets 
No. 
@25% of cost limited to Rs. 12,000/- per set. 

Assistance for distribution 
of Micro Nutrients 
Ha. 
@25% of cost limited to Rs. 1000/- per ha. 

Distribution of Planting 
Matterial and Soil 
Treatment Chemicals 
Ha. 
@25% of cost limited to Rs. 1000/- per ha.. 

Visit of Farmers to model 
farms, institutes etc. 
Nos. 
40 sugarcane farmers @ 50% of the cost limited to 
Rs. 50,000/- 
 
In Sugarcane Development Programme under Macro Management Mode during 2011-
12 the total financial target was Rs. 2871.88 Lakh and achievement was Rs. 2779.79 Lakh by 
different state. Component wise progress given at Annexure – XXXII.

Chapter 11: Special initiatives taken for encouraging the cultivation of the 
sugarcane crop 
 
11.1 
Minimum support price (MSP) including additional incentives (Bonus) on 
procurement of crop produce from the states: 
The Minimum Support Price (MSP) or Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP) in 
sugarcane is declared by Govt. of India every year to protect the benefits of the 
sugarcane growers keeping in view the highest of the inputs and other parameters. The 
State Government also declared State Agreed Price for Sugarcane over the FRP. The 
minimum statutory price/ fair & remunerative price of sugarcane fixed by the government 
is given at Annexure-XXXIII

Chapter 12: Workshops, conference and seminars 
12.1 Outcomes/ recommendations of annual workshop conducted by ICAR/ 
SAUs: 
Recommendations pertaining to Sugarcane crop emerged during National Conference 
for Kharif Campaign-2009 held on 20th & 21st March 2009. 
 
S.No 
Recommendations made during Kharif campaign 2009
1. 
Adoption of IPM measures against wooly aphid in 
Maharashtra and Karnataka 
2. 
Encourage cultivation of proper intercrops to increase 
returns to the farmers. 
3. 
Adopt efficient irrigation techniques to achieve higher 
water use efficiency; through use of drip irrigation. 
4. 
Effort to increase area under early maturing varieties with 
high recovery percentage. 
 
12.2 Recommendation of important conference / seminar / brain storming 
sessions related to crop. 
a. Recommendations emerged during Pre-Kharif DAC-ICAR Interface 
held on 16th February 2006. 
Issue
Recommendation made by ICAR 
Development 
of 
sugarcane 
varieties resistant to flooding 
particularly for Eastern India. 
 Water logging tolerant varieties such as 
Jalpari (CoSe 96436), Sarayu (Co 87263), Moti 
(Co 87268), Gandak (Co 89029), Pramod (BO 
128) have been developed for water logging 
areas of Eastern India, Breeder Seed production 
is taken up as per the indent received from DAC. 
 
b. Recommendations emerged during Pre-Rabi DAC-ICAR Interface held on 30-31 
August 2005 
Issue
Recommendation made by ICAR 
In spite of very low productivity of 
sugarcane, Chhattisgarh State is 
encouraging the cultivation of crop 
and has also established sugar mills. 
Suitable 
sugarcane 
varieties 
for 
Chhattisgarh with their yield potential 
may be indicated. 
 Chhattisgarh is not a traditional sugarcane 
growing 
State. 
However, following 
varieties 
developed for peninsular zone may be evaluated 
in Chhattisgarh State. 
Variety
Cane Yield
Early
Co 85004 (Prabha) 
90.5 
Co 
94008 
(Shyama) 
119.8 
Midlate

Co 86032 (Nayan) 
102.0 
Co 87025 (Kalyani) 
98.2 
Co 87044 (Uttara) 
101.0 
Co 8371 (Bhima) 
117.7 
CoM 
88121 
(Krishna) 
88.7 
Co 
91010 
(Dhanush) 
116.0 
 
 
c. Recommendations emerged during Pre-kharif DAC-ICAR Interface held on 
19th February 2009 
Issue
Recommendation made by ICAR
1. Development 
of 
IPM 
Module for the control of 
White Grub in sugarcane 
(emerging as a serious 
problem in western UP in 
last two year 
1. IPM Module for the control of White Grub in sugarcane involves; 
Mechanical Measure: 
i. Mass collection of adults beetles through light trap after first shower 
in May-June at 7-8 PM 
ii. Deep ploughing before first shower in May 
Cultural Measure: 
- Crop rotation with paddy 
- Flooding of infested field for 5 days (5 cm water level) during July-
August 
Pheromone Dispener: 
-Select one host tree within a radius of 15 m and spray monocrotophos 
36 WSC or quinalphos 25 EC, 0.05% during day time and in evening, 
place 3-4 pheromone dispensers/three continuously for 3-4 evenings 
after adult emergence 
-Drenching of chlorpyriphos 20 EC , quinalphos 25 EC @ 4 L /ha or 
Imidacloprid 200 SL @ 300 Ml /ha in 1500 L water in standing crop 
within 21 days of mass emergence of beetles or soil application of 
phorate 10 G or quinalphos 5 G @ 2 kg ai per ha at plant base during 
1st week of July. 
2. Development 
of 
sugarcane 
harvester 
suited for topographical 
area to reduce the cost 
of production and timely 
harvesting of sugarcasne
Tractor operated front mounted two raw sugarcane harvester has been 
development at IISR, Lucknow for basal cutting. A separate equipment 
detrasher cum detopper has also been developed for de-trashing of the 
harvested sugarcane stalks. Both these equipment can be used in 
conjunction as a system for sugarcane harvesting, The system is 
suitable for prevalent agronomic practices in vague in the country.

d. Recommendations emerged during Pre-kharif DAC-ICAR Interface held on 
11th February 2010 
Issue 
Recommendation made by ICAR 
To 
develop 
a 
technology package for 
enhanging sprouting in 
winter harvested cane. 
For overcoming this important constraints to productivity of 
ratoon crops, pre harvest application of the potassium (80 kg 
K2O/ha) with last irrigation one month before harvesting and 
foliar spray of 200 ppm ethrel 15 days before harvest, 
improved sprouting and productivity of winter initiate ratoon. 
Spraying of Glyphosate @ 0.16 kg a.i per ha on to the 
standing crop 2 months before harvesting improve not only 
the juice quality of the crop but alos improves sprouting of 
the stubble buds in the succeeding ratoon crop. Post harvest 
application of Cycocel @ 5 kg ai per ha increased the yield of 
succeeding ratoon crop by 23%. Post harvest application of 
the formulation containing Vitamins and Minerals, and 
potassium also improves sprouting of suitable buds as well 
as productivity by 22-23% in winter initiated ratoon. 
2. Development of 
sugarcane variety 
suited for water logging 
condition. 
A number of sugarcane varieties have been released and 
notified for cultivation for different sugarcane growing zones 
of the country including states of UP and Bihar. List of 
sugarcane varieties tolerant to water logging are given 
below” 
S. 
No. 
Sugarcane 
growing zones 
Variety 
Remarks 
A. 
North west zone 
(Punjab, 
Haryana, 
Rajasthan, 
Central 
and 
western UP and 
Uttrakhand) 
Co-98014 
(Karan-1) 
Early 
Co-pant 
97222 
Midlate 
B. 
North 
central 
zone 
(Eastern 
UP, West Bengal 
and Jharkhand) 
Cose-
96436 
(Jalpari) 
Midlate 
Colk-
94184 
(Birendra) 
Early 
Co-0233 
(Kamal) 
Early 
Co-0233 
Midlate

12.3 
Brain Storming on 24th March, 2009 at IISR, Lucknow: 
 
 
 
A brain storming discussion was held in IISR, Lucknow to improve sugarcane 
production and sugar recovery in India with emphasis on UP and Maharashtra under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. S.P. Tiwari, DDG (CS & Edn.) on 24th March 2009. In the session 
the following points were set for low productivity and sugar recovery: 
i. Monoculture of sugarcane i.e. lack of crop rotation in some areas, leads to deletion 
of nutrients in soil and adversely affect cane productivity. 
ii. Cultivation of rejected and unapproved varieties not only lealds to low cane 
productivity, but also pose a risk to buildup of diseases, particularly red rot. 
iii. Ratoon crop is generally receives much less attention and care by the cane growers 
leading to lower cane productivity. 
iv. Post harvest deterioration in cane quality on account of staling and delayed crushing 
contribute to low sugar recovery. 
v. Inadequate availability of quality seed of new sugarcane varieties and poor seed 
replacement rate adversely affect the realization of potential cane yield of varieties. 
vi. Increasing problem of soil compaction/ hard pan coupled with inadequate sub-
soiling not only adversely affects plant growth, but also promotes lodging of canes. 
vii. In U.P. rainfall in the month of May and June 2008, coinciding with the tillering 
phase in sugarcane, adversely affect tillering which led to lesser number of millable 
canes. Due to continuous rains, fertilizers could not be applied on time. These 
factors coupled with shortage of phosphatic and potassic fertilizers, particularly in 
UP, led to low cane productivity. 
viii. 
Relatively higher minimum temperature and higher relative humidity during 
maturity phase delayed sugarcane ripening resulting in low sugar recovery. 
Moreover, crushing of immature cane due to imbalance crushing schedule lowered 
sugar recovery. 
ix. In Maharashtra, low rainfall and inadequate water availability during grand growth 
phase together with shortage of fertilizer (DAP), labour and power resulted in 
reduced cane productivity. 
x. Area under early maturing high sugar varieties is very less which led to low average 
sugar recovery. 
12.4 
Recommendations 
To overcome these reasons following recommendation have been made: 
a. 
Researchable issues: 
i. 
While characterizing new sugarcane varieties, POL (%) cane may also be reported 
to better indicate its recoverable sugar percent. 
ii. Weather based fore-warning system may be developed for management of major 
insect pest and diseases of sugarcane. 
iii. Work on sugarcane ripeners may be intensified at location where conditions are not 
favourable for ripening. The Bio-safety aspects of the chemicals used as ripeners 
should also be duly addressed.

b. Developmental issues: 
i. 
Seed production of recommended varieties of sugarcane should be intensified by the 
State Govt. department and three tier seed programme be strictly followed. Micro-
propagation (tissue culture) may be made an integral part of seed production 
programme for quick multiplication of disease-free seed material. In seed production 
programme, molecular disease indexing techniques developed at research institutes 
may be employed for monitoring of healthy seed production. 
ii. IISR, Lucknow may circulate a list of varieties available for seed production to sugar 
factories as well as to ISMA and NFCSF to enable sugar factories to send indent of 
seed to IISR. 
12.5 
Recommendations of the National Seminar on “Mechanization of Sugarcane 
Cultivation” held at IISR, Lucknow on March 19-20, 2010. 
 
After deliberations, following recommendations/ Action Plan emerged for spread 
of mechanization in sugarcane cultivation: 
i. 
Plan to be prepared by the sugar mills for mechanical planting in their respective 
area in the initial stage and subsequently more operation could be included. 
ii. Identifying the machine and source of supply in consultation with IISR, Lucknow, if 
required. 
iii. Manufacturer selected should ensure the quality control for which he shall send 
prototype to IISR for performance testing, if desired. This quality will have to be 
maintained by him in future supply. 
iv. Manufacturer will provide working design of the supplied equipment and will ensure 
after sale service during the use period. 
v. IISR may provide training to the manufacturers and the users at their cost for the 
proper operation and maintenance of the equipment. 
vi. Any suitable device pertaining to the sub-soiling through RMD/Sub-soiler should be 
used to improve soil health and ratoon productivity. For this also sugar factories 
should plan in advance. 
vii. Initially, DSCL and Balrampur group of Industries have agreed to initiate this plan in 
their areas of operations. 
viii. Group meeting may be arranged in future to take stock of the progress made in this 
regard. 
 
12.6 
Important Institution 
a. National 
i. 
Vasantdada Sugar Institute Manjari (Bk), Tal. Haveili, Dist. Pune, PIN-412 307 
(Maharashtra) 
ii. 
Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Rae Bareli Road, Post Dilkusha, Lucknow-
226 002 (U.P.) 
iii. Sugarcane Breeding Institute, ICAR Coimbatore-641 007 (Tamilnadu). 
iv. National Sugar Institute, PO. NSI, Kalyanpur, Kanpur – 208017 (U.P.) 
v. 
U.P. Council of Sugarcane Research Sahjahanpur, U.P.

vi. Indian Sugar Mills Association, Ansal Plaza, ‘C’ Block, 2nd Floor, August Kranti 
Marg, Andrews Ganj, New Delhi- 110049 
vii. National Federation of Cooperative Sugar Factories Ltd (NFCSF) Ansal Plaza, 
Block-C, 2nd Floor, August Kranti Marg, New Delhi. 
 
 b. 
International: 
i. 
International Society of Sugar Cane Technologists, Mauritius, 
ii. Brazilian Society of Sugar and Ethanol Technologists, Brazil. 
 
c. 
National and international Agencies informative for farmers, development officers, 
policy planners and scientific community. 
 
Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA) 
Sugar House, 39, Nehru Place, 
New Delhi-110 019. 
E-mail: sugarmill@nda.vsnl.net.in 
 
National Federation of Co-operative Sugar Factories Ltd., (NFCSF) 
Vaikunth (IIIrd Floor), 82-83, Nehru Place, New Delhi-110 019. 
E-mail: nfcsf@ndb.vsnl.net.in 
 
All India Distillers Association (AIDA) 
805, Siddharth, 96, Nehru Place, New Delhi 110 019. 
E-mail: distiler@vsnl.net.in 
 
The Sugar Technologies Association of India (STAI) 
21, Community Centre, East of Kailash, New Delhi 110 065. 
E-mail: staidel@vsnl.net.in 
 
Indian Sugar and General Industry Export Import Corporation Ltd., 
21, Community Center, East of Kailash, New Delhi 110 065. 
E-mail: isiec@ndb.vsnl.net.in 
 
Sugar Technology Mission 
D-5 Apartment, Qutab Hotel, New Mehrauli Road, New Delhi 110 016. 
 
d. 
Website of advisory services to farmers: The website developed by the Sugarcane 
Department, Uttar Pradesh www.up.cane.org. This website is providing sugarcane 
advisory, their marketing, supply ticket, weighment, cane payment to the farmers. This 
website is very helpful for the sugarcane growers I the state of Uttar Pradesh. 
 
 
http://www.upcane.org/sis/en/index.asp 
http://www.sugarindia.com/glossary.htm

http://www.vsisugar.com 
http://www.fcamin.nic.in/dfpd_html/index.asp 
http://www.cogenindia.org/default.asp 
http://www.staionline.org 
http://ncdc.nic.in/index.php 
http://www.coopsugar.org 
http://www.indiansugar.com 
http://www.tifac.org.in/index1.htm 
http://nsi.gov.in 
www.sugarcaneweb.co.uk 
www.bonsucro.com 
www.issct2013.com.br 
www.sugarcane.res.in 
www.wsro.org 
www.upcane.org 
www.sugarcaneweb.co.uk 
www.vsisugar.com 
www.sugarbazar.com 
 
 
http://www.issct.org 
 
12.7 
Researchable and Developmental issues: 
For crop specific research issues like e.g. varieties, production technologies farm 
implements, climate change and product development, value addition, marketing etc. 
a. Researchable issue: 
i. 
Development of the varieties capable of giving higher cane yield, sugar recovery 
along with field stability and good Ratooning ability 
ii. 
Assessment and refinement of agro-techniques for sustainable farming system 
and management of sugarcane under late planting situation. 
iii. Development of module for controlling whit grub and mealy bug in sugarcane 
which is emerging as a serious problem. 
iv. Designing, developing, Sugarcane harvester suited in Indian topographical, 
cultural and economical conditions. 
v. 
Enhancement of sprouting in winter harvested cane.

b. Developmental issue: 
i. 
Strengthening of seed production programme at institute or research centre 
Simultaneously focusing of rearing of quality seed nurseries at farmers field. 
ii. 
Cluster approach in Transfer of technology with modern tools. 
 
12.8 
Strategies for sugarcane productivity enhancement: 
 
 a. Agronomic Strategies: 
- Adoption of suitable varieties & their blending. 
- Strengthening of seed production programme 
- Water Management. 
- Integrated Nutrient Management Approach. 
- Integrated Pest Management. 
- Ratoon Management. 
- Adoption of suitable Time and Method of Planting. 
- Promotion of intercropping. 
- Promotion of mechanization. 
- Credit flow and its utilization. 
 
b. Extension Strategies: 
Timely and efficient dissemination of the innovative crop production technologies 
to the farmer’s field is very essential for increasing sugarcane productivity through 
modern tool of TOT: 
• Demonstration. 
• Training programmes at different level. 
• Exposure visits. 
• Distribution of technical literature. 
• Village Gosthies 
• Farmers Field School (FFS) 
• Audio-visual aids/video clippings. 
 
Since, the development is a regular feature and joint venture and It should be 
made with the help of concerned department of State Government extension officials, 
sugar factories, SAUs, KVK’s, Regional Krishak Sewa Kendra etc. 
 
c. Diversification & Automation in sugar industry: 
Sugarcane is a multi-product crop and therefore, avenue for use of its by-products and 
co-products is advocated to make the sugar industry economically viable consistently and making 
the sugarcane cultivation sustainable through assured marketing. The following diversification in 
the sugar industry is advocated by establishing the bi-product based subsidiaries: 
i. 
Baggase based: Co-generation, Paper, News print, MDPB etc 
ii. Molasses based: Ethanol, Distilleries, cattle feed , pharmaceutical, 
iii. Press mud bases: Bio-compost 
iv. Other value added products etc

d. Development need: 
i. 
To popularize techniques for conservation of water which includes trash mulching, 
cultivation of sugarcane varieties with deep root system, successful application of 
water under skip furrow method. 
ii. Inter-cropping, green manuring and dual purpose legumes need to be strengthened 
and popularize to meet the triple fold objectives of nutrient economy, crop 
diversification and mid season income generation. 
iii. There exist an ample scope of reducing the production cost of sugarcane, enhance 
profitability and regulate the cane supply to sugar mills for maintaining sugar recovery 
in sugar mills through ratoon canes, therefore, multiple Ratooning with proper ratoon 
management practices is advocated. 
iv. Recycling of sugarcane crop residues viz. root/trash through vermi-culture, press mud 
as a soil ameliorants from sugar factory and distilleries is promoted for sustainability 
of soil. 
v. Balance varietal planning with adequate proportion of early, mid-late varieties in each 
sugar factory area is required, so that, sugarcane with the maximum sucrose content 
is supplied throughout the crushing period to enhance the realize sugar recovery. 
vi. Possibility may be explored for pre-harvest maturity survey, harvesting schedule and 
supply management in a proper sequences to sustain the sugar recovery. 
vii. Selection of cane seed and its preparation before planting is highly desirable to avoid 
the incidence of different diseases like Red rot, wilt, smut, etc. 
 
e. Recommendations of Dr. C. Rangarajan committee Report 
i. 
Prime Minister had set up a committee under the chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan, 
Chairman, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister to look into all the issues 
relating to the deregulation of the sugar sector. The committee has completed its task, 
after several rounds of deliberations, consultations with stakeholders, and discussion with 
Chief Ministers of major sugar-producing states. The report was submitted to the Prime 
Minster on 10-10-2012. 
ii. A major recommendation of the committee relates to revising the existing arrangement 
for the price to be paid to sugarcane farmers, which suffers from problems of 
accumulation of arrears of cane dues in years of high price and low price for farmers in 
other years. The existing arrangement comprises a Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP) 
announced each year by the Centre, under the Sugarcane Control Order and on the 
advice of CACP, as the minimum price of sugarcane. However, many states in north 
India also announce a State Advised Price (SAP) under state legislation. Generally, the 
SAP is substantially higher than the FRP, and wherever SAP is declared, it is the ruling 
price. Instead of the present arrangement, the committee has proposed that at the time of 
cane supply, farmers be paid FRP as the minimum price, as at present. Further, 
subsequently, on a half-yearly basis, the state government concerned would announce 
the ex-mill prices of sugar and its by-products, and farmers would be entitled to a 70% 
share in the value of the sugar and by-products produced from the quantity of cane 
supplied by each farmer. Based on the share so computed, additional payment, net of 
FRP already paid, would then be made to the farmer. Since the sugar value estimate

includes return on capital employed, this implies that farmers would also get a share of 
the profits. With such a system in operation, states should not declare an SAP. 
iii. The committee has also recommended dismantling of the levy obligation for sourcing 
PDS sugar at a price below the market price. States should be allowed henceforth to fix 
the issue price of PDS sugar, while the existing subsidy to states for PDS sugar transport 
and the difference between the levy price and the issue price would continue at the 
existing level, augmented by the current level of implicit subsidy on account of the 
difference between the levy price and the open market price. This will free the industry 
from the burden of a government welfare programme, and indirectly benefit both the 
farmer and the general consumer since the industry passes on the cost of levy 
mechanism to farmers and consumers. 
iv. The committee has recommended dispensing with the present mechanism of regulated 
release of non-levy sugar, as it imposes additional costs on factories on account of 
inventory accumulation. 
v. The committee has recommended that cane area reservation ultimately be phased out 
and contracting between farmers and mills allowed for enabling the emergence of a 
competitive market for assured supply of cane, in the interest of farmers and economic 
efficiency. However, in case some states want to continue it for the time being, they 
should do so while ensuring that area reservation is done for at least three to five years 
at a time, so that industry has a stake in its development. Further, wherever and 
whenever a state discontinues area reservation, the Centre should remove the stipulation 
of a minimum distance between two mills. 
vi. On external trade, the committee has favoured a stable policy regime with modest tariff 
levels of 5% to 10% ordinarily, and dispensing with outright bans and quantitative 
restrictions. The committee has also recommended dispensing with the mandatory 
requirement of jute packaging. In respect of molasses, the committee favours free 
movement and dismantling of end-use based allocation quotas that are in vogue in 
several states, to enable creation of a national market and better prices for this valuable 
by-product as well as improved efficiency in its use. 
vii. Members on the committee were Shri T. Nandakumar, Member, NDMA, Dr Ashok Gulati, 
Chairman, Commission on Agricultural Costs & Prices, Dr Raghuram Rajan, Chief 
Economic Advisor, Shri Sudhir Kumar, Secretary, Food & Public Distribution, Shri Ashish 
Bahuguna, Secretary, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, and Dr K. P. Krishnan, 
Convener, as the then Secretary, Economic Advisory Council.

Annexure-I(a) 
State wise Area of sugarcane crop in India 
 (Lakh ha) 
Sl.No. 
State 
2008-09 
2009-10 
2010-11 
2011-12 
2012-13* 
A. Tropical

Andhra Pradesh 
2.00 
1.58 
1.92 
2.04 
2.00 

Gujarat 
2.20 
1.54 
1.90 
2.02 
2.03 

Karnataka 
2.80 
3.37 
4.23 
4.30 
4.10 

Madhya Pradesh 
0.71 
0.60 
0.65 
0.69 
0.88 

Maharashtra 
7.70 
7.56 
9.65 
10.22 
9.40 

Tamil Nadu 
3.10 
2.93 
3.16 
3.82 
3.33 
 
B. Sub-tropical

Bihar 
1.10 
1.16 
2.48 
2.35 
2.35 

Haryana 
0.90 
0.74 
0.85 
0.95 
1.07 

Punjab 
0.81 
0.60 
0.70 
0.80 
0.84 

Uttar Pradesh 
20.80 
19.77 
21.25 
21.62 
22.77 

Uttarakhand 
1.10 
0.96 
1.07 
1.08 
1.12 

West Bengal 
0.20 
0.14 
0.15 
0.16 
0.18 
 
Others 
0.78 
0.78 
0.84 
0.80 
0.94 
 
Grand Total 
44.20 
41.73 
48.85 
50.85 
51.01 
 * Provisional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure I(b) 
State wise production of sugarcane crop in India 
(Million tonnes) 
S.No. 
State
2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
2011-12
2012-13*
 
A. Tropical

Andhra Pradesh 
15.38 
11.71 
14.96 
16.73 
15.90 

Gujarat 
15.51 
12.40 
13.76 
14.17 
14.21 

Karnataka 
23.33 
30.44 
39.66 
38.81 
32.72 

Madhya Pradesh 
2.98 
2.54 
2.67 
2.68 
4.22 

Maharashtra 
60.65 
64.16 
81.89 
81.86 
61.32 

Tamil Nadu 
32.80 
29.75 
34.25 
39.28 
34.93 
B. Sub-tropical 

Bihar
4.96
5.03
12.76 
12.07
11.58 

Haryana 
5.13 
5.34 
6.04 
6.95 
7.59 

Punjab 
4.67 
3.70 
4.17 
4.67 
5.04 

Uttar Pradesh 
109.05 
117.14 
120.55 
128.82 
135.64 

Uttarakhand 
5.59 
5.84 
6.50 
6.59 
6.85 

West Bengal 
1.64 
1.00 
1.13 
1.17 
1.62 
 
Others 
3.34 
3.26 
4.04 
3.87 
3.71 
 
Grand Total
285.03
292.31
342.38
357.67
335.33
* Provisional

Annexure-I( c) 
State wise productivity of sugarcane crop in India 
(tonnes/ha) 
Sl.No.
State 
2008-09 
2009-10
2010-11
2011-12 
2012-13*
A. Tropical 

Andhra Pradesh 
82.15 
74.11 
77.92 
82.00 
79.50 

Gujarat 
73.03 
80.52 
72.42 
70.20 
70.00 

Karnataka 
88.65 
90.33 
93.76 
90.26 
79.80 

Madhya Pradesh 
42.40 
42.33 
41.08 
38.70 
47.80 

Maharashtra 
81.29 
84.87 
84.86 
80.10 
65.20 

Tamil Nadu 
108.15 
101.54 
108.39 
102.80 
105.00 
 
B. Sub-tropical 

Bihar 
32.44 
43.36 
51.45 
51.50 
49.40 

Haryana 
63.29 
72.16 
71.06 
73.30 
71.00 

Punjab 
60.27 
61.67 
59.57 
58.40 
60.00 

Uttar Pradesh 
57.12 
59.25 
56.73 
59.60 
59.60 

Uttarakhand 
62.02 
60.83 
60.75 
61.02 
61.20 

West Bengal 
74.71 
71.43 
75.33 
73.13 
90.00 
 
All India 
64.60 
70.00 
70.10 
70.30 
65.80 
* Provisional 
Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012. 
State-wise & District –wise Area, production and yield of sugarcane may be seen at Directorate 
website: http://dsd.dacnet.nic.in

Annexure-II 
State wise sugar production (2002-03 to 2011-12) (000 tonnes) 
S.
No 
State
2002-03 
2003-04
2004-05 
2005-06
2006-07 
2007-08
2008-09 
2009-10
2010-11 
2011-12* 

A.P.

Bihar

Chhattisgarh

Goa

Gujarat

Haryana 

Karnataka 

Kerala

M.P.

Maharashtra

Orissa 

Puducherry 

Punjab

Rajasthan

Tamilnadu

U.P.

Uttarakhand 

W.B. 

All India 
20145 
13456
12691 
19267
28364 
26357
14539 
18912
24394 
26343
* Provisional 
Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012.

Annexure- III 
 Area, Production and Yield of Sugarcane in India 
Year 
Area under 
Sugarcane (000 
ha.) 
Production of sugarcane 
(000 tonnes) 
Yield 
of 
cane 
per ha. (tones) 
1930-31 

36354 
30.90 
1940-41 

51978 
32.10 
1950-51 

54823 
32.10 
1960-61 

110001 
45.50 
1970-71 

126368 
48.30 
1980-81 

154248 
57.80 
1990-91 

241045 
65.40 
2000-01 

295956 
68.60 
2001-02 

297208 
67.40 
2002-03 

287383 
63.60 
2003-04 

233862 
59.40 
2004-05 

237088 
64.80 
2005-06 

281172 
66.90 
2006-07 

355520 
69.00 
2007-08 

348188 
68.90 
2008-09 

285029 
64.60 
2009-10 

292302 
70.05 
2010-11 

342382 
70.09 
2011-12* 

357667 
70.30 
 
Provisional 
 
Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012.

Annexure-IV 
Area, production and yield of sugarcane in major growing countries (2006 to 2010) 
Country 
Area (Lakh ha) 
Production (Lakh tones) 
Yield (Ton/ha) 

Argentina 
3.15 
3.20 
3.60 
3.45 
3.50 
264.50 
239.60 
269.60 
255.80 
250.00 
83.97 
74.88 
74.89 
74.14 
71.43 
Australia 
4.15 
4.09 
3.81 
3.91 
4.05 
371.28 
363.97 
326.21 
302.84 
314.57 
89.47 
89.07 
85.72 
77.40 
77.67 
Brazil 
63.56 
70.81 
81.40 
86.18 
90.77 
4774.11 
5497.07 
6453.00 
6916.06 
7174.62 
75.12 
77.63 
79.27 
80.26 
79.04 
China 
13.89 
15.97 
17.54 
17.08 
16.95 
933.06 
1137.32 
1249.18 
1162.51 
1114.54 
67.18 
71.23 
71.22 
68.08 
65.75 
Colombia 
4.10 
4.10 
3.83 
3.80 
3.80 
384.50 
93.77 
93.86 
100.42 
101.45 
101.32 
India 
42.01 
51.50 
50.55 
44.20 
41.70 
2811.72 
3555.20 
3481.88 
2850.29 
2923.00 
66.93 
69.03 
68.88 
64.49 
70.10 
Mexico 
6.80 
6.90 
6.69 
7.11 
7.04 
506.76 
520.89 
511.07 
494.93 
504.22 
74.53 
75.44 
76.37 
69.65 
71.63 
Pakistan 
9.07 
10.29 
12.41 
10.29 
9.43 
446.66 
547.42 
639.20 
500.45 
493.73 
49.23 
53.20 
51.49 
48.62 
52.36 
Philippines 
3.92 
3.83 
3.98 
4.04 
3.63 
315.50 
320.00 
340.00 
325.00 
340.00 
80.43 
83.56 
85.43 
80.45 
93.71 
Thailand 
9.42 
9.86 
10.29 
9.32 
9.78 
476.58 
643.66 
735.02 
668.16 
688.08 
50.57 
65.26 
71.41 
71.66 
70.36 
Others 
47.28 
47.58 
48.2 
48.81 
45.99 
2939.12 
2950.95 
2950.81 
3009.23 
2757.29 
62.16 
62.02 
61.22 
61.65 
59.95 
World 
207.35 
228.13 
242.3 
238.19 
236.64 
14223.8 
16161.08 
17340.97 
16870.27 
16945.05 
68.60 
70.84 
71.57 
70.83 
71.61 
 
Source: FAO.org

Annexure-V 
 Yield gap of sugarcane in India with other countries 
(t/ha) 
country 

Argentina 
83.97 
17.04
74.88
5.85
74.89 
6.01
74.14 
9.65 
71.43
1.33
Australia 
89.47 
22.54
89.07
20.04
85.72 
16.84
77.40 
12.91 
77.67
7.57
Brazil 
75.12 
8.19
77.63
8.60
79.27 
10.39
80.26 
15.77 
79.04
8.94
China 
67.18 
0.25
71.23
2.20
71.22 
2.34
68.08 
3.59 
65.75
-4.35
Colombia 
93.77 
26.84
93.86
24.83
100.42 
31.54
101.45 
36.96 101.32
31.22
India 
66.93 
69.03
68.88 
64.49 
70.10
Mexico 
74.53 
7.60
75.44
6.41
76.37 
7.49
69.65 
5.16 
71.63
1.53
Pakistan 
49.23 
-17.70
53.20
-15.83
51.49 
-17.39
48.62 
-15.87 
52.36
-17.74
Philippines
80.43 
13.50
83.56
14.53
85.43 
16.55
80.45 
15.96 
93.71
23.61
Thailand 
50.57 
-16.36
65.26
-3.77
71.41 
2.53
71.66 
7.17 
70.36
0.26
 Source: FAO.org 
 
Annexure-VI 
Export- import of sugar on financial year basis (2000-01 to 2011-12) 
Financial year 
(April to March) 
EXPORT
IMPORT
Quantity 
(Tonnes) 
Value (Rs. in 
Crores) 
Quantity 
(Tonnes) 
Value 
(Rs. in 
Crores) 
2000-01 
338691 
430.98 
30404 
31.11 
2001-02 
1456448 
1728.29 
26578 
32.60 
2002-03 
1662370 
1769.49 
41430 
32.83 
2003-04 
1200600 
1216.59 
74400 
62.70 
2004-05 
108690 
149.53 
932740 
976.18 
2005-06 
321204 
569.11 
558769 
651.59 
2006-07 
1643403 
3127.47 

3.49 
2007-08 
4684554 
5412.16 

2.24 
2008-09 
3331997 
4448.74 
386099 
583.11 
2009-10 
44045 
110.23 
2424045 
5961.24 
2010-11 
3249300 
10352.27 
1004100 
2723.21 
2011-12 (Up to 
September, 11) 
2717300 
8736.15 
70454 
209.64 
Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012.

Annexure-VII 
COUNTRY WISE EXPORT (TONNES) OF SUGAR FROM INDIA BY 
ISEC DURING 2001 TO 2010 
 
S. No. 
Country 

Afghanistan 

13883 

Albania 

Bangladesh 
12500 
127737 
80134 
13168 

86531 
309759 

Belgium 
10000 

10016 

China 

Croatia 

Cyprus 

Egypt 
48883 
11232 

Eritrea 
37500 
16672 

Ethiopia 

21000 

Estonia 

France 

Georgia 
15800 

Germany 

Greece 

Indonesia 
16750 
17600 
26000 
70192 

Iran 

35700 
54801 

Iraq 

13125 

Italy 

Korea 

17000 

Latvia 

Malaysia 
64524 
21138 

44603 

Malta 

Pakistan 
335782 

53151 

Philippines 
11500 

Portugal 
10460 
20217 
10788 
10079 
10070 
16350 

Russia 

Rwanda 

Saudi Arabia 

11432 

Senegal 

Singapore 

Somalia 

19052 
135565 

Spain 

Srilanka 

44289 
49462 
15146 
10485 
21684 
412649 

Taiwan 

Tanzania 

18568 

Uganda 

UAE 
16887 

164937 
357419 
260321 

UK 

USA 

11087 

Yemen 
36443 
50778 
23074 
210309 

Zambia 

 
Total 
56592 
309489 
323212 
48033 
10547 
370473 
289034 
713759 

3016918

Annexure-VIII 
Released and notified varieties of sugarcane 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of variety
Maturity 
group 
Notification Number and 
date 
Recommended area of cultivation

Cos 91230 (Raseeli) 
Mid 
Season 
Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and 
Central Western Uttar Pradesh 

Co Pant 90223 
Uttar Pradesh, Harayana and Panjab 

Uttara (Co87044) 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,Kerala 

Bhavani (Co 86249) 
Orissa, Coastal Andhra, Pradesh, 
Coastal Tamil Nadu, Pondicherry 

Kalyani (Co 87025) 

Prabha (Co 85004) 

Dhanush (Co 91010) 

Nayana (Co 86032) 
Pradesh Tamil Nadu, Kerala 

Bhima (Co 8371) 

Moti (87268) 
Eastern UP, Bihar, West Bengal and 
North East regions of North Central 
and North East Zones 

Sarayu (Co-87263) 
Eastern UP, Bihar, West Bengal and 
North East regions of North Central 
and North East Zones 

CoM 7714 (Krishna)/ 
CoM 88121 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, interior Andhra 
Pradesh and plateau region of Tamil 
Nadu 

Pramod (B.O.-128) 
S.O.92(E) 02.02.2001 
Bihar, Eastern UP ,West Bengal 

Haryana-92 (CoH-
92201) 
Medium 
S.O.92(E) 02.02.2001 
North West Zone 

Gandak (Co-89029) 
Eastern UP, Bihar, West Bengal and 
North East regions of North Central 
and North East Zones 

Rasbhari (CoSE-
95422) 
Medium 
Uttar Pradesh , Bihar and West 
Bengal 

Rajbhog (CoSE-
92423) 
Medium 
Uttar Pradesh , Bihar and West 
Bengal 

CoS-767 
Mid to 
late 
Haryana and Uttra Khad 

Madhumathi 
S.O.937(E) 04.09.2002 
Kerala

Rashmi (CoS-96234) 
S.O.642(E) 31.05.2004 
Eastern UP, Bihar and West Bengal 

Jalpari (CoS-96434) 
Mid Late 
S.O.642(E) 31.05.2004 
Uttar Pradesh , Bihar and West 
Bengal 

Rachana (CoS-
95255) 
S.O.642(E) 31.05.2004 
U.P. Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan 

Shyama (Co-94008) 
S.O.161(E) 04.02.2004 

Madhuri (Co-394164) 
S.O.161(E) 04.02.2004 

Haryana Ganna-119 
(CoH-119) 
S.O.1566(E) 05.11.2005 
Haryana 

Haryana Ganna-110 
(CoH-110) 
S.O.1566(E) 05.11.2005 
Haryana 

CoC(sc)-22 
S.O.1566(E) 25.08.2005 

Sweta (CoS-94270) 
S.O.122(E) 02.02.2005 
West Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, 
Uttaranchal, Haryana And Rajasthan 

CoC(Sc)23 (COC-01-
61) 
S.O.1572(E) 29.09.2006 
Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Pondicherry 
And Tamil Nadu 

COSI(Sc)6 
S.O. 599(E) 25.04.2006 
Tamil Nadu 

CoG(sc)5 
S.O. 599(E) 25.04.2006 
Tamil Nadu 

CoS-96268 (Mithas) 
Rajasthan, Uttranchal, Haryana, 
Punjab And Western Uttar Pradesh 

CoS-96275 (Sweety) 
Haryana, Punjab, 
Rajasthan,Uttrakhand And Western 
and Central Uttar Pradesh 

CoC-671 (Vasanth-1) 
Madhya Pradesh 

Sarada (93A145) 
Andhra Pradesh 

Co Pant 97222 
S.O. 122(E) 06.02.2007 
Uttaranchal, Western and Central Uttar 
Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab and 
Rajasthan 

Co-98014 (Karan-1) 
S.O. 122(E) 06.02.2007 
Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, 
Uttarakhand, Western and Central UP 

Co-99004 (Damodar) 
S.O. 122(E) 06.02.2007 

COJ-89 
 

CoLK 94184 
(Birendra) 
 
SO 2458 (E) 16.10.2008 
U.P., Bihar and West Bengal 

Co 0232 
Eastern UP, Bihar, West Bengal and 
North East regions of North Central 
and North East Zones 

Co 0233 
Eastern UP, Bihar, West Bengal and 
North East regions of North Central 
and North East Zones 

Sulabh(Co-2001-13) 

Co-2001-15

Co-0238 (Karan-4) 
SO 454 (E) 11.02.2009 

Co-0118 (Karan-2) 
SO 449 (E) 11.02.2009 

C.O.-94012 
SO 449 (E) 11.02.2009 
Maharashtra and Karnataka 

Co-0239 (Karan-6) 
S.O. 2136(E) 31.08.2010 

Co-0124(Karan-5) 
SO 449 (E) 11.02.2009 

Co-0218 
S.O. 2136(E) 31.08.2010 
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Interior Andhra 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala 

CoC(sc)24 
S.O. 2136(E) 31.08.2010 
Tamil Nadu and Puducherry 

Co-92005 
S.O. 283(E) 07.02.2011 
Maharashtra 

CoH-128 (Haryana 
Ganna128) 
 
Medium 
S.O. 456(E) 16.03.2012 
Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Uttaranchal 

Co-05011(Karan-9) 
S.O. 1708(E) 26.07.2012 

Co.0237 (Karan-7) 
S.O. 2125(E) 10.09.2012 

Co.0403 
S.O. 2125(E) 10.09.2012 
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Interior Andhra 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala 

Uttara 
 
S.O. 952 (E) 10.04.2013 

Kanakmahalakshmi 
 
S.O. 952 (E) 10.04.2013 

CoSe-01421 (Imarti ) 
 

CO-05009 (Karan-10) 
Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Uttaranchal and Western and Central 
Uttar Pradesh 

Co-06030 
Orissa, coastal Andhra Pradesh and 
coastal Tamil Nadu 

CO-06027 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, interior Andhra 
Pradesh and plateau region of Tamil 
Nadu 
 
Annexure - IX 
 Varieties resistant to stresses, suitability to biotic stresses 
List of varieties relatively resistant to different pests 
Pest 
Varieties 
Shoot Borer 
Co243, 281, 285, 312, 356, 421, 449, 453, 527, 617, 775, 853, 975, 1007, 1048, 
1049, 6239, 6402, 6403, 6507, 6508, 6510, 6601, 6610, CoS 673, 729 BO 17, 
34,70, and 99 
Internode Borer 
Co285, 453, 513, 617, 853, 915, 1007, 1287, 6806, and CoJ 46 
Stalk borer 
Co 395, 951, 1007, 1236, 6303, 7302, 7303, CoJ 46 and CP 43/47 
Top borer 
Co 205, 285, 331, 421, 453, 513, 617, 1007, 1111, 1158, 1330, 1349, 7224, CoJ 
67 and CoL 9 
Pyrilla
Co 313, 515, 545, 615, 612, 628, 738, CoL 22 and BO 3 
Whitefly
Co 229, 312, 313, 385, 386, 513, and 617 
Scale insect 
Co 678, 1132, 6501, 6907, 7002, 7314,7411, 62174, 8008, 8009 8014 
White grub 
Co285, 453, 975, 1158, 1287, 6304, CoS 510 and CoJ 67

Annexure-X 
Sugarcane varieties tolerant to drought, water logging and salinity 
Developed in India 
S.No
Variety 
Year of 
Release
State where recommended for 
cultivation 
 
Reaction to abiotic 
stresses 

Co-98014 
(Karan-1) 

Co-99004 
(Damodar) 

C.O.-94012 

Maharashtra and Karnataka 

Co-2001-
13(Sulabh) 

Co-2001-15 

Co-0118 
(Karan-2) 

Co 0232 

Eastern UP, Bihar, West Bengal and 
North East regions of North Central and 
North East Zones 
Tolerant to water 
logging 

Co 0233 

Eastern UP, Bihar, West Bengal and 
North East regions of North Central and 
North East Zones 
Tolerant to water 
logging 

Co-0238(Karan-
4) 

Co-0239 
(Karan-6) 

Co-0218 

Co.0237 
(Karan-7) 

Co.0403 

 
Salt stress 
Co205, Co 285, Co 453, Co 6801, Co 62422, Co 1111, CoH 70, CoJ 1328, 
Co 449, Co 997 CoA 7602,Co 87263, Co 8347, Co 85004, Si 87241, Si 
87231, So S86071, Co 85019, CoG 93076,CoG 95076, Co8208, CoC 671, 
Co8145, Co7717, CoS 767, Co93009, Co 93011, Co 93016, Co 93015, Co 
93021, CoG 9307, 
Source: Sugarcane Production Management and Agro industrial imperatives by Dr. S. Solomon et. al. Pg 293 & 439

Annexure- XI 
State wise farmer’s preferred / ruling varieties under cultivation 
Andhra Pradesh 
Variety 
2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
Early varieties: Co.6907, 
84A125, 81A99, 83A30, 85A261, 
87A298, Co.8014, 86V96, 91V83, 
and others 

62000 
92000 
Mid-late Varieties: 
COA7607, CO8021, COT.8201, 
Co7805, COV92102 (83V15), 
83V288 and others 
40000 
34000 
51000 
Late varieties: Co.7219, 
CoR8001, 87A380, Co7706, and 
others 
29000 
24000 
37000 
 
Bihar 
Sl.No. Variety 
2008-09
2009-10 
2010-11 

BO.99 

BO-120 

BO-130 

BO-139 

BO-141 

BO-144 

BO-145 

COP-9301 

12824
19285

COSE-95436 

COSE-98231 

COS-8436 
13525

COS-88230 

COS-95255 

COS-96268 

COS-89029 

COS-95130 

BO-102 

BO-138 

COS-687 

BO-76 

BO-91 
76379
57476
62908

BO-110 
16937
19331
22940

BO-128 

BO-136 

BO-137 

12010
13665

BO-147 

BO-108

BO-109 

COP-9206 
12408
14382
18014

COP-9302 

COS-767 

COSE-95422 
21456
28379
28123

COSE-95427 

COS-8432 

COLK-8102 

COSE-92423 

14979

COP-9702 

UP-9530 

11152

COSE-96436 

CO-97264 

COS-91269 

CO-1148 

CO-1158 

COJ-83 

HR-90 

COJ-88 

COJ-85 

Others 
25377
28986
24848
Total
264656
251387
312085
 
Gujarat 
S.No
. 
Variety 
2008-09 
2009-10 

Coc.671 

Co.86002 
17837
17853

Co.97009 

Co.86032 
42812
53622

Cosi.95071 
16643

CoN.91132 

Co.86249 
32064
27025

Co 6304 

CoN 05071 
12210
21955

CoN 05072 

Co 99004 

CoM 0265 

others 

11448
 
Total:
221300
153979

Haryana 
S. 
no. 
Variety 
2006-07
2007-08 
2008-09

Early Group 

Coj-64 
11210

Coj-85 

Coj-83 

Cos-92 

Cos-56 

Others 

Mid Group 

Co-7717 

Coh-99 

Cos-8436 
61565
56548
35371

Cos-88230 
11705
11375
 
 
Others 

14735
12290
Late Group 

Cos-767 
20190
19704

Co-1148 

Coh-110 

Others 

Total 131810 140000
74001
 
Karnataka 
Variety 
2008-09 
2009-10
2010-11 
 
Early 

COC 671 
60000 
45000
64000 

CO 92020 
40000 
12000 

CO 94012 
20000 
40000
 
Mid 

CO 8014 
30000 

CO 86032 
40000 
131000
195000 

CO 62175 
25000 
30000
50000 

CO 8371 
22000 

Late 

CO 740 
25000 
15000
15000 

CO 8011 
15000 
42500
55000 

CO 419 

Total
281000 
336521
422000

Maharashtra 
S.No. 
Variety 
2008-09 
2009-10
2010-11

CO 740 

CO 7219 

COM 7125 

CO 7527 

CO 8014 

COC 671 
 241400 
178000
191000

COM 88121 

CO 86032 
 404600 
438000
547000

CO 419 

CO 8011 
 18300 

CO 8021 

CO 94012 
 38700 
19000
20000

VSI 434 

COM 265 

50000
129000

Co VSI 9805 

CO 92005 
 
41000
 
Others 
 32900 
29000
10000
 
Total 
768000 
735600
965000
 
Odisha 
 
 
 
Sl.No. 
Variety 
2008-09 
2009-10 
2010-11 

Co.62175 
13.28 
11.74
11.5

Co.86032 
3.04 
3.1
3.8

Co.A.89085 
4.55 
4.65
4.7

Co.7805 
1.14 
1.1
1.12

Co.8021 
1.9 
1.95
2.25

Co.87A298 
2.26 
2.3
3.15

Co.86V96 
2.28 
2.38
2.56

Co.95A145 
1.9 
1.95
1.6

Others 
7.59 
7.69
9.15
 
Total 
37.94 
36.86
39.83

Punjab 
S.No. 
Variety
2008-09 
2009-10 
2010-11 

Early varieties 

CoJ 64 

CoJ83 

CoJ85 
28905
21940
24527
 
31574
24160
26837
 
Mid Varieties 

CoJ 88 

CoS 8436 
10017

COH-119 

25098
22849
17094
 
Late Varieties 

Co89 

Co1148 

Co-89003 
11009

11411

Others 
12997

10681
 
Grand Total 
81080
60018
70014
 
 
Tamilnadu 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Varities 
2007-08 
2008-09 
2009-10 

Co..94012 
290298 
268656 
279551 

Co.92012 
38942 

Co.94010 
10621 
13124 
12564 

CoC.24 

Others 

351366 
301080 
307820

Uttar Pradesh 
 
Sl.No. 
Varieties
2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
 
Early Varieties 

Co.J. 64 
43090
24979
18972 

Co.S. 8436 
121976
86869
78032 

Co.S. 88230 
91014
64059
57804 

Co.S. 95255 
18471
13771
12164 

Co.S. 96268 
11107

Co.S. 98231 
22972
27245
32301 

Others
10197
11957
14664 
 
318827
237555
222120 
 
Mid and Late varieties 
 
 
 
Suitable

U.P. 39 
17973
14657
15087 

Co.S. 767 
701184
612435
705731 

Co.S. 8432 
106205
97025
96824 

Co.Pt. 90223 

20292
21639 

Co.S. 92423 
497093
469690
565205 

Co.S. 94257 

Co.Se. 95422 
45041
43379
51308 

Co.S. 97264 
89718
75247
103017 

Others 

23841
47249 
 
1465557
1362856
1613797 
 
Water Logging

U.P. 9530 
12157

12285 

Co.S. 96436 

14379
10836
14067 
 
Total Suitable 
1170026
1373692
1627864 
 
Unsuitable

Co.Lk. 8102 
34467
38619
26294 

Co.S. 90260 

Co.Se.96232 

Co.Se. 96234 

U.P. 22 

B.O. 91 

B.O.128 

Co.S. 1148 

Co.S.7918 

Co.S. 91269 
133343
84167
107329 

Others
162009
49768
111755 
 
(Unsuitable) 
341008
176608
251413 
 
Total (Midlate) 
1820944
1550300
1879277 
 
Grand Total
2139771
1787855
2101397

Uttarakhand 
 
S.No. 
Early variety 
2008-09 
2009-10 
2010-11 

Cos.8436
15005
12785 
16002

Cos.88230
15174
14285 
12235

Cos.96258

Cos.96268

Coj.64

Cos.98247

CoPant-94211

Coj-85

Mid Late variety

Cos.767 
41334
39250 
45437

Co.Pant.84212 

Co.Pant.90223 

CoS-97264

CoSe-92423
11153

Cos.8432

Cos.94257

Co.Pant.96219 

UP-9530 

CoSe-96436

CoPant-97222

CoPant-99214

CoJ 88 

Others

Total 
107251
93018 
104860
 
West Bengal
 
 
 
 
Sl.No.
Variety 
2008-09 
2009-10 
2010-11 

B.O. -91 

COB-94104 
(Madhuri) 

CO-62033 

Local 

Total 
17557 
13750
15017

Annexure-XII 
SUGARCANE, SUGAR AND MOLASSES PRODUCTION AT A GLANCE 
STATEMENT SHOWING AREA, PRODUCTION AND YIELD OF SUGARCANE, FACTORIES IN OPERATION, DURATION, CAPACITY, CANE 
CRUSHED, SUGAR AND MOLASSES PRODUCTION & THEIR RECOVERY % CANE 
Year 
Area 
under 
Sugarcane 
(000 ha.) 
Production 
of 
sugarcane 
tones) 
Yield 
of 
cane 
per ha. 
(tones)
No. of 
factories 
in 
operation 
Average 
duration 
days 
Average 
capacity 
(tones/ 
day) 
Total 
cane 
crushed 
tonnes) 
Total 
Sugar 
produced 
tonnes) 
Recovery 
of sugar 
(% cane) 
Molasses 
production 
tonnes) 
Molasses 
(% cane) 
1930-31 

36354 
30.90 

8.96 
1940-41 

51978 
32.10 

11492 

9.70 

3.76 
1950-51 

54823 
32.10 

11348 

9.99 

3.60 
1960-61 

110001 
45.50 

31021 

9.74 

3.99 
1970-71 

126368 
48.30 

38205 

9.79 

4.22 
1980-81 

154248 
57.80 

51584 

9.98 

4.12 
1990-91 

241045 
65.40 

122338 
12047 
9.84 

4.45 
2000-01 

295956 
68.60 

176660 
18511 
10.48 

4.43 
2001-02 

297208 
67.40 

180346 
18528 
10.27 

4.48 
2002-03 

287383 
63.60 

194365 
20145 
10.36 

4.57 
2003-04 

233862 
59.40 

132511 
13546 
10.22 

4.46 
2004-05 

237088 
64.80 

124772 
12690 
10.17 

4.42 
2005-06 

281172 
66.90 

188672 
19267 
10.21 

4.53 
2006-07 

355520 
69.00 

279295 
28367 
10.16 
13111 
4.69 
2007-08 

348188 
68.90 

249906 
26357 
10.55 
11313 
4.53 
2008-09 

285029 
64.60 

144983 
14539 
10.03 

4.51 
2009-10 

292302 
70.00 

185548 
18912 
10.19 

4.53 
2010-11 

342382 
70.10 

239807 
24394 
10.17 
10970 
4.57 
2011-12* 

357667 
70.30 

256975 
26343 
10.25 
11824 
4.60 
 * Provisional Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012.

Annexure-XIII 
 
STATEMENT SHOWING FACTORIES IN OPERATION, OPENING STOCKS, PRODUCTION, 
IMPORTS, CONSUMPTION AND EXPORTS OF SUGAR (Lakh Tonnes) DURING LAST 10 YEARS 
Season 
No. 
of 
factories 
in 
operation 
Carry 
over 
of 
sugar 
in 
the 
beginning of the 
season 
during the 
year 
Imports
Total 
available 
supply 
Consumption 
Exports 
Closing 
stock of 
Sugar 
2000-01 

94.34 
185.11 
279.45 
162.00 
9.87 
107.58 
2001-02 

107.58 
185.28 
292.86 
167.81 
10.94 
114.14 
2002-03 

114.14 
201.45 
0.41 
316.00 
183.84 
15.00 
117.16 
2003-04 

117.16 
135.46 
4.00 
256.62 
172.85 
2.94 
80.83 
2004-05 

80.83 
126.90 
21.38 
229.11 
185.00 
0.04 
44.07 
2005-06 

44.07 
192.67 
236.74 
189.45 
11.07 
36.22 
2006-07 

36.22 
283.67 
319.89 
201.60 
17.28 
101.01 
2007-08 

101.01 
263.57 
364.58 
220.00 
49.57 
95.01 
2008-09 

95.01 
145.39 
24.03 
264.43 
230.00 
2.17 
32.26 
2009-10 

32.26 
189.12 
40.80 
262.18 
210.00 
2.35 
49.83 
2010-11 

49.83 
243.94 
297.77 
207.36 
26.00 
60.41 
2011-12* 

60.41 
263.43 
323.84 
220.00 
33.90 
69.94 
* Provisional 
Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012. 
 
Annexure-XIV 
UTILIZATION OF SUGARCANE FOR DIFFERENT PURPOSES 
 
Year 
of 
Sugarcane 
(000 
tonnes) 
Cane used for (000 tonnes) 
Percentage of sugarcane production 
utilized for 
of white 
sugar 
Seed, 
feed & 
chewing 
etc. 
Gur and 
Khandsari 
of white 
sugar 
Seed, 
feed & 
chewing 
etc. 
Gur and 
Khandsari 
2000-01 
295956 
176660 
33930 
85366 
59.70 
11.50 
28.80 
2001-02 
297208 
180346 
34724 
82138 
60.70 
11.70 
27.60 
2002-03 
287383 
194365 
33524 
59494 
67.60 
11.70 
20.70 
2003-04 
233862 
132511 
27830 
73521 
56.70 
31.40 
2004-05 
237088 
124772 
28213 
84103 
52.60 
35.50 
2005-06 
281172 
188672 
33459 
59041 
67.10 
21.00 
2006-07 
355520 
279295 
42307 
33918 
78.60 
09.50 
2007-08 
348188 
249906 
40525 
50126 
71.80 
11.60 
16.60 
2008-09 
285029 
144983 
33833 
106213 
50.90 
37.20 
2009-10 
292302 
185548 
34784 
71970 
63.50 
24.60 
2010-11 
342382 
239807 
40743 
61832 
70.00 
18.10 
2011-12* 
357667 
256975 
42527 
58165 
71.90 
16.20 
* Provisional 
Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012.

Annexure-XV 
STATE WISE UTILIZATION (%) OF SUGARCANE FOR SUGAR PRODUCTION IN MAJOR STATES 
S. 
State 
2006-07
2007-08 
2008-09 
2009-10
2010-11 
2011-12* 

A.P.
79.86 
65.18 
38.59 
47.38 
68.95 
69.27 

Bihar 
87.37 
89.13 
54.46 
54.13 
32.44 
39.44 

Gujarat 
85.67 
75.97 
63.89 
91.09 
89.82 
66.53 

Haryana
69.89 
68.45 
31.40 
49.63 
71.93 
70.03 

Karnataka
87.89 
109.08 
92.78 
78.76 
85.14 
89.55 

M.P. 
68.82 
57.30 
14.26 
33.65 
63.74 
61.23 

Maharashtra
101.67 
94.47 
70.16 
95.68 
97.96 
94.14 

Orissa
49.06 
62.30 
29.26 
51.23 
57.49 
82.61 

Punjab 
84.57 
85.97 
41.32 
57.08 
82.33 
91.46 

Tamilnadu
66.75 
59.90 
47.20 
48.17 
59.30 
64.80 

U.P.
66.81 
59.95 
37.86 
48.43 
53.41 
59.66 

Uttarakhand 
91.92 
53.47 
31.50 
54.33 
49.79 
30.99 
All India 
78.56 
73.38
49.20
63.48 
70.04
71.85
* Provisional 
Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012. 
 
Annexure-XVI 
STATE WISE CANE CRUSHED (in ‘000 tonnes) BY SUGAR FACTORIES IN INDIA 
 
S. 
No. 
State 
2002-03 
2003-04 
2004-05 
2005-06 
2006-07 
2007-08 
2008-09 
2009-10 
2010-11 
2011-12* 
1. 
AP 
11980 

12303 
17323 
13201 

10317 
11588 

Bihar 

3. 
Chhattisgarh 

Goa 

5. 
Gujarat 
11828 

10787 
13390 
12801 

11295 
12360 

6. 
Haryana 

7. 
Karnataka 
17303 
10942 
10283 
17953 
25197 
26685 

23977 
33765 
34753 
8. 
MP 

Maharashtra 
53441 
29077 
19456 
44578 
79884 
76144 
40023 
61390 
80223 
77063 
10. 
Orissa 

11. 
Pudducherry 

12. 
Punjab 

13. 
Rajasthan 

14. 
Tamilnadu 
16645 

11492 
23185 
27452 
22970 
16606 
14328 
20310 
25455 
15. 
Uttar Pradesh 
59271 
46352 
51472 
60809 
89494 
74739 
45482 
56734 
64381 
76855 
16. 
Uttarakhand 

17. 
West Bengal 

All India
194365 
132511 
124772 
188672 
279295 
249906 
144983 
185548 
239807 
256975 
* Provisional 
Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012.

Annexure-XVII 
STATEMENT SHOWING THE MINIMUM STATUTORY PRICE/ FAIR & REMUNERATIVE PRICE OF 
SUGARCANE FIXED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Year 
Minimum Statutory 
price of Sugarcane 
(Rs. per quintal) 
Linked 
to 
basic sugar 
recovery % 
cane 
Premium 
on 
every 
0.1% 
increase in sugar 
recovery % cane 
(Rs. per quintal) 
Range 
of 
Minimum 
Sugarcane Price on the 
basis of Col. 1, 2 & 3 (Rs. 
per quintal) 
2000- 01 
59.50 
0.70 
59.50 to 96.60 
2001- 02 
62.05 
0.73 
62.05 to 100.74 
2002- 03 
69.50 
0.82 
69.50 to 113.78 
2003- 04 
73.00 
0.85 
73.00 to 118.90 
2004- 05 
74.50 
0.88 
74.50 to 110.58 
2005- 06 
79.50 
0.88 
79.50 to 112.94 
2006- 07 
80.25 
0.90 
80.26 to 119.85 
2007- 08 
81.18 
0.90 
81.18 to 118.98 
2008- 09 
81.18 
0.90 
81.18 to 123.48 
2009- 10 
107.76 (SMP) 
1.13 
NA 
129.84 (FRP) 
1.37 
129.84 to 179.16 
2010- 11 
139.12 (FRP) 
1.46 
139.12 to 197.52 
2011-12 
145.00 (FRP) 
1.53 
145.00 to 203.14 
2012-13 
170.00 (FRP) 
1.79 
NA 
 Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012.

Annexure-XVIII 
PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION OF SUGAR, GUR & KHANDSARI 
 
Year 
Population 
in Million 
(As on 1st 
March) 
Consumption (lakh 
tones) 
Per capita 
consumption 
(kg/annum) 
Total per capita 
consumption 
ofsugar, gur & 
khandsari (kg/ 
annum) 
Sugar 
Gur & 
Khandsari 
Sugar 
Gur & 
Khandsari 
1960-61 

21.13 
66.87 
4.8 
15.2 
20.0 
1970-71 

40.25 
74.37 
7.4 
13.6 
21.0 
1980-81 

49.80 
85.22 
7.3 
12.5 
19.8 
1990-91 

107.15 
90.71 
12.7 
10.7 
23.4 
2000-01 

162.00 
86.09 
15.7 
8.4 
24.1 
2001-02 

167.81 
83.11 
16.1 
8.0 
24.1 
2002-03 

183.84 
56.94 
17.3 
5.4 
22.7 
2003-04 

172.85 
71.46 
16.0 
6.6 
22.6 
2004-05 

185.00 
81.75 
16.9 
7.5 
24.4 
2005-06 

189.45 
57.39 
17.1 
5.2 
22.3 
2006-07 

201.60 
33.38 
18.0 
3.0 
21.0 
2007-08 

220.00 
50.93 
19.3 
4.5 
23.8 
2008-09 

230.00 
107.92 
19.9 
9.3 
29.2 
2009-10 

210.00 
73.12 
17.9 
6.2 
24.1 
2010-11 

207.36 
59.94 
17.5 
5.1 
22.6 
2011-12* 

220.00 
56.71 
18.3 
4.7 
23.0 
 * Provisional 
 Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012 
 
 Annexure-XIX 
Temperature requirement for different growth stages of sugarcane 
 
S.No. 
Critical Stages of 
sugarcane 
Maximum 
temperature (oC) 
Minimum 
temperature 
(oC) 
Relative 
Humidity (%) 
1. 
Germination 
32.0 
20.0 
- 
2. 
Tillering 
35.0 
18.0 
- 
3. 
Grand Growth 
30.0 
14.0 
80-85 
4. 
Ripening 
30.0 
20.0 
50-55 
Source: Sugarcane Production technology in India by Dr. R. S. Verma

Annexure-XX 
Important growing / Planting and harvesting time of sugarcane in different States 
 
Sl. No. 
State 
Time of sowing 
Harvesting time 
Tropical Regions 

Andhra Pradesh 
Adsali
Aug.­Sept 
March­April
Jan­Mar
December­April 

Assam 
Jan­Mar
November­March

Bihar
­Oct
­Feb­Mar 
November­February
Nov. – April 

Gujarat 
Nov.­Dec.
Nov.­Dec. 

Haryana 
­Oct
­Feb­Mar 
Nov. – Dec.
Dec. – April 

Karnataka
Adsali
Jul­Aug 
Dec. – Jan.
April­May
Jan. – March 

Kerala
Oct­Dec 
August – March 

Madhya Pradesh
Dec. – April
Jan­ Feb. 

Maharashtra
Adsali
June­July
Nov. – Dec.
Jan. – Feb.
Feb.­March 

Orissa
Jan­Mar
Dec.­ May

Punjab
Feb­Mar
Nov.­March 

Rajasthan
­Oct
­Feb­Mar 
Nov.­March 

Tamil Nadu 
­July­Sept 
­Feb to March & May 
­Jul­Sept 
July­Sept. 
­Feb to March & May 
­Jul­Sept 

Uttar Pradesh
­End Sept­Oct
­Feb­Apr 
December
Dec. – May 

West Bengal
Feb­Apr 
Feb­Apr

Annexure-XXI 
EXTENT OF LOSSES DUE TO DIFFERENT INSECT & PESTS IN INDIA 
S. 
No. 
Name of Pest
% reduction in 
cane yield 
% reduction in 
sugar recovery 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
Early shoot borer 
Internode borer 
Top shoot borer 
Stalk borer 
Gurdaspur borer 
Rood borer 
Scale insect 
Mealy bug 
Black bug 
Pyrilla 
Arboridia sp. 
White Fly 
White grub(H) 
Whiter grub(L) 
Termite 
Rodents 
Sugarcane woolly aphid 
22 to 33 
34.88 
21-37 
Up to 33 
5-15 
35.00 
32.60 
poor germination 
upto 35 
31.60 
14.70 
86.00 

22.27 
7 to 39 
2 CCS 
1.7-3.07 
0.2-4.1 
1.7-3.07 
0.1-0.8 
0.3-2.90 
1.5-2.5 
brix loss 16.20 
0.1-2.8 
2.0-3.0 
1.0-1.5 
1.4-1.8 
5.0-6.0 
complete drying 
4.5 
- 
1.2-3.43

Annexure-XXII 
Management schedule for insect pests of sugarcane for Sub-tropical India. 
 
Crop stage 
Pests covered 
Control measures 
Selection of 
Borers and scale 
Seed should not be taken from fields having more incidence 
crop for seed
insect 
 
Seed 
Borers and scale 
Setts showing borer damage should be discarded 
selection 
insect 
 
Seed 
Scale insect 
Dipping the setts in 0.1 % malathion I 0.08 % dimethoate for 
treatment 
 
15 minutes 
At planting 
Termites, shoot 
Application of chlorpyriphos or endosulfan at 1.0 Kg a. i. per ha 
over cane setts. 
time 
borer, root borer 
 
April- May 
Shoot borers 
Release S. inference @ 125 gravid females per ha. GV 
 
 
spraying 107- 108 IB per ml shoot borer 
 
Thrips 
Spraying with dimethoate 0.04% 
June- July 
Top borer 
Soil application of 3 G carbofuran @ 1 Kg a. i. or 10 G 
 
 
phorate @ 3 Kg a. i. per ha against third brood of the pest in
 
 
2nd week of June in Eastern U. P. and Bihar, in 4th week of 
 
 
June 1st week of July in West U. P., Haryana and Punjab 
 
 
Release of laboratory bred Isotima iavensis 
July August 
White grubs 
Hand collection of adult beetles and grubs. Soil treatment 
 
 
with quinalphos 5 G at 2.5 kg. a. i. per ha coinciding with rush of 
adult emergence. 
 
 
 
July- 
Gurudaspur 
Mechanical control of infested plants having gregarious 
September 
borer, Plassey 
Larval stage as large campaign. 
 
Borer 
 
 
 
Pyrilla 
Redistribution and Colonization of E. melanoleuca cocoons or 
eggs masses 
 
 
Foliar spray of M. anisopliae @ 107 spores 1ml
 
 
Release of Pyrilla adults seeded with M. anisopliae @ 250 
adults Iha. 
July-Oct. 
Stalk borer, internode 
Release of T. chilonis at 50,000 per ha at 10 days interval 
borer, Gurudaspur 
 
 
borer, root borer 
 
October – 
November 
Stalk borer 
Detrashing of dried leaves 2 times at 30 days interval 
 
 
Removal of late shoots at 15 days intervals till harvest 
 
Spraying cane stalk with monocrotophos at 0.75 Kg a. i. per ha 
following detrashing. 
November- 
Stalk borer 
Beauria bassiana spraying @ 10 7 spores per ml to check the 
December 
 
carry over borer population 
 
Black Bug 
Release of adults seeded with spores of Beauria bassiana 
 
@ 5000 per ha to check the carry over population 
Harvesting 
For pests, in 
Deep harvesting 
 
general (scale 
Removal of water shoots or late shoots 
, insect, mealy 
Trash burning 
 
bug, black bug 
 
 
and pyrilla)

Annexure- XXIII 
Management schedule for insect pests of sugarcane for Tropical India 
S.No
Crop stage
Pests 
covered 
Control practices
1. 
Land preparation
White grub 
 
Termite 
 Sugarcane 
woolly aphid 
(SWA) 
Expose the grub stages by deep ploughings for 
predation. Apply 1 kg. of 2 % methyl parathion dust in 1 
cart load of FYM or compost. 
Destroy the termitoria present on the bunds and nearer 
to the field 
Paired or wider row planting 
2. 
Selection of seed 
crop 
Scale insect, 
mealy bug, 
white fly, borers, 
SWA 
Seed should be free from the pest infestation and seed 
plots must be selected by concerned Agri. officers. 
3. 
Seed selection 
Scale insect, 
mealy bug, 
white fly, borers 
Sugarcane setts damaged by borers, scale insects etc. 
should be discarded. The discarded setts, leaves left 
after seed preparation should be buried. 
4.
Sett treatment 
Scale insect, 
mealy bug, SWA
Dipping of setts in 0.15% malathion or 1- 0.08% 
dimethoate for 10-15 minutes. 
5.
At planting(January) 
Termite, 
shoot borer, 
root borer 
 
Soil application of 6 G lindane or 4:4 G sevidol @1 kg. 
a.i. per ha.or Caldan 4 G @ 0.5 kg. a.i. per ha. 
Drenching of 20 EC chlorpyriphos @ 1 kg. a.i. in 1000 lit. 
of water per ha. or soil application of 5 G quinalphos @ 
1.5 kg. a.i.per ha. 
6. 

days 
after 
planting (January) 
Shoot borer 
 
 
 
Spittle bug 
Release Trichogramma chilonis @ 3 to 5 lakh 
parasitized eggs1ha. at 15 days intervals in suitable 
installments. 
Placement of pheromone sleeve traps @ 25 per ha. for 
C. infuscatellus control & destroy male adults 
Spraying of 0.08% dimethoate 
7.

days 
after 
planting (February) 
Shoot borer 
 
White grub 
SWA 
Root borer 
Small earthing up followed by trash mulching. Do not 
undertake 
maize, 
sorghum 
as 
intercrops. 
Prefer 
coriander, garlic, and onion as intercrops. Prefer paired 
row system for planting. 
Collect and destroy the grub stages during weeding. 
Needbase application of insecticide. 
 Drenching of 20 EC chlorpyriphos @ 1 kg. a.i. per ha in 
1000 lit. of water per ha. or soil application of 5 G 
quinalphos @ 1.5 kg. a.i per ha. 
8. 
60 days after 
planting(March) 
White fly 
Leafhopper 
Pyrilla 
White grub (L) 
Scale insect and 
mealy bug, SWA
 
Remove 2-3 leaves containing pest stages. Spray 0.08% 
monocrotophos or DDVP with addition of 2.5 % N in 
spray solution or spray neemark @ 5 lit per ha. 
Release 1000 viable cocoons of Epiricania parasites per 
ha. 
Apply 10 G phorate @ 2.5 kg. a.i. per ha. 
Apply 10 G phorate @ 2.5 kg. a.i. per ha. 
Detrash the lower dry leaves and spray 0.08 %

Rodents 
dimethoate.
Apply bromadiolone cake 0.005 % in rodent burrows or 
bait stations continuously for two days. 
9. 
90-120 days after 
planting, (April – May) 
White grub (H) 
 
Internodes 
borer 
Topshoot borer
 White fly 
Collection and destruction of beetles from neem trees 
during night time immediately after first heavy showers. 
Release T. chilonis @ 3 to 5 lakh parasitized eggs per 
ha. at 15 days intervals in suitable installments 
Destroy the egg masses and remove the affected canes 
along with pest stages. 
Avoid excess use of N fertilizers before earthing up. 
10.
 
150 – 180
 
days after 
planting (June-July) 
White grub (H) 
Pyrilla 
 
 
 
 SWA 
 Grasshopper 
Collection and destruction of beetles from neem trees 
during night time immediately after first heavy showers. 
Soil application of 10 G phorate @ 2.5 kg. per ha or 2 % 
methyl parathion dust @ 2 kg. a. i. ha. 
Release 1000 viable cocoons of Epiricania parasites per 
ha. 
Spot spraying of bio-pesticide like Verticillium 
Dusting of 2 % methyl parathion dust @ 40 kg. per ha in 
sugarcane and on bunds. 
11. 
210 – 240 days after 
planting 
(August –September) 
White fly
 
 
 
 
Pyrilla 
 
 
SWA 
 
 
White grub (L) 
 
 
Army worm 
 
Leafhopper 
 
Rodents 
 
Nematodes 
 
 Snail 
Remove 2-3 leaves containing egg and pupal stages. 
Spray 0.08 % DDVP or monocrotophos with addition of 
2.5 % N in spray solution or spray neemark @ 5 lit1ha. 
or release 1000 adults of Chrysoperla carnae predator 
per ha. 
 Release 1000 viable cocoons of Epiricania parasites 
per ha. 
 
Augmentation of predators like Dipha, 
 Micromus and Syrphid fly @ 1000 larvae or cocoons 
per ha. 
 
Collection and destruction of adults from sugarcane. 
Apply 10 G phorate @ 2.5 kg. a.i. per ha. 
 
Collection and destruction of larvae during rainy season. 
 
Remove 2-3 leaves containing pest stages. Spray 0.08 
% DDVP or monocrotophos. 
 Apply bromadiolone cake 0.005 % in rodent burrows or 
bait stations continuously for two days 
Soil application of 3 G carbofuran @ per kg. a.i. per ha. 
Cleaning of bunds and fields, 
collection and destruction of snails, dusting of lime on 
snails. Metaldehyde and iron phosphate baiting. 
12. 
 
240 days onwards till 
harvest. 
 
Internode borer
 
 
Pyrilla 
Release Trichogramma chilonis @ 3 to 5 lakh 
parasitized eggs per ha. at 15 days interval in suitable 
installments and use pheromone traps.

Release 1000 viable cocoons of Epiricania parasites per 
ha. 
13. 
At harvest 
Root borer 
Harvesting at ground level to destroy the pest stages. 
Destroy stray of plants 
14. 
Post harvest 
 
White 
fly 
Root 
borer White grub 
Snail 
 
SWA 
 
In heavily affected fields burn the trash after harvest. 
Do not keep the ratoons in heavily affected fields. 
Use rotavator and subsoiler to destroy the pest stages 
Proper crop rotation 
Annexure-XXIV 
Important Diseases of Sugarcane and Their Management 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
disease 
Causal agent
Symptoms 
 
Disease management. 

Red rot 
 
Glomerella 
tucumanensis 
The 
spindle 
leaves 
(3rd14th)) display drying. 
At a later stage, stalks 
become 
discoloured 
and 
hollow. 
Acervuli 
(black fruiting bodies) 
develop on rind and 
nodes. 
After 
splitting 
open the diseased stalk, 
a sour smell emanates. 
The internal tissues are 
reddened 
with 
intermingled transverse 
white 
spots. 
In 
advanced stage of the 
disease, 
the 
colour 
becomes earthy brown 
with pith cavity in the 
centre showing white 
cottony 
hyphae 
and 
sometimes 
fruiting 
bodies 
fungus 
(acervuli). 
In 
rainy 
season, 
the 
disease 
spreads so fast that 
whole crop dries and 
not a single millable 
cane is obtained. 
Resistant 
or 
moderately 
resistant varieties should be 
used. 
Any 
sett 
showing 
reddening at the cut ends or at 
the nodal region should be 
discarded. 
Healthy 
seed 
should be planted. Such seed 
must be produced from crop 
raised from heat treatment of 
seed canes in moist hot air at 
54°C for 2.5 hour at 99% 
humidity. As soon as disease’ 
is noticed, the affected clump 
along with root system should 
be 
uprooted 
and 
burnt. 
Bunding 
affected 
field 
should be done to avoid 
movement 
rain 
or 
floodwater. 
Ratooning 
diseased 
crop 
should 
be 
avoided. 
Diseased 
crop 
should be harvested as early 
as possible. Crop rotation 
should be followed in affected 
fields.

2. 
Smut 
 
Ustilago 
scitaminea 
 
The new sprouts are 
lean and lanky ,profuse 
in 
number 
and 
the 
growing point projects 
out a long black whip 
covered 
with 
black 
spores. Affected plants 
have slender and thin 
canes with erect and 
pointed leaves. Such 
plants can be easily 
located 
before 
the 
production 
of 
smut 
whip. 
Resistant 
or 
moderately 
resistant varieties should be 
used. 
Healthy 
seed 
(as 
mentioned 
under 
red 
rot) 
should 
be 
planted. 
Pre-
treatment of seed pieces by 
dipping 
in 
2.5% 
organomercurial 
fungicide 
helps reduce the incidence. 
Removal of affected clump 
showing smut whip during 
tillering 
phase 
effectively 
reduced 
the 
disease 
incidence. 
3. 
 
Wilt 
 
Cephalosporium
sacchari 
Wilt symptoms usually 
appear after monsoon. 
Infected 
clumps, 
individually 
or 
collectively, 
show 
stunting and yellowing of 
top leaves. In severe 
cases, 
whole 
clump 
dries, 
cane 
becomes 
hollow and lighter in 
weight. Red discoloration 
in internodes is more 
intense towards nodes 
which 
do 
not 
emit 
specific odour. 
Healthy seed (as mentioned 
under red rot) should be 
planted. Seed setts may be 
treated with organomercurial 
fungicide 
before 
planting. 
Crop 
rotation 
should 
be 
followed in affected field. 
 
4. 
 
Grassy 
shoot 
 
Mycoplasma like 
organism (MLO) 
 
 
A large number lean and 
lanky, pale sprouts in the 
clump 
appear 
like 
a 
‘bunchy grass’. Normal 
stalks are not formed. 
 
Resistant 
or 
moderately 
resistant varieties should be 
planted. Healthy seed (as 
mentioned under red rot) 
should be used. Setts may be 
treated with antibiotics like 
Achromycin, 
Terramycin, 
Tylan, Erythromycin @ 250 
ppm. 
5. 
Mosaic 
 
Sugarcane 
Mosaic Virus 
(SCMV) 
 
Young leaves of the 
crown held against the 
light 
source 
display 
chlorotic 
and 
normal 
green 
area 
imparting 
mosaic pattern. The 
Seed should be obtained 
from disease free plant crop. 
Secondary transmission of 
the disease by insect vectors 
can 
be 
controlled 
by 
application 
of 
Malathion

chlorotic area may show 
reddening or necrosis. 
Leaf sheath may also 
display such sysmptoms. 
(0.1%) or Dimecron(0.2%) 
 
Annexure XXV 
State wise number of sugar factories in operation in India 
S. No. 
State 
2006-07 
2007-08 
2008-09 
2009-10 
2010-11 
2011-12* 
1. 
Andhra Pradesh 

2. 
Assam 
3. 
Bihar 

4. 
Chhattisgarh 

5. 
Dadra Nagar Haveli 

6. 
Goa 

7. 
Gujrat 

8. 
Haryana 

9. 
Karnataka 

10. 
Kerala 
11. 
Madhya Pradesh 

12. 
Maharashtra 

13. 
Nagaland 
14. 
Orissa 

15. 
Puducherry 

16. 
Punjab 

17. 
Rajasthan 

18. 
Tamil Nadu 

19. 
Uttar Pradesh 

20. 
Uttarakhand 

21. 
West Bengal 

All India 


2012. 
Provisional 
Source: Cooperative sugar: Vol.44 (4), December 2012 
State-wise sugar factories may be seen at Directorate website: http://dsd.dacnet.nic.in 
Annexure XXVI 
State wise duration of crushing season for sugarcane in India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(in days) 
S. No.
State
2007-08
2008-09
2009-2010
2010-11 
2011-12*

Andhra Pradesh 

Bihar 

Chhattisgarh 

Gujrat 

Haryana 

Karnataka 

Madhya Pradesh 

Maharashtra 

Orissa

Puducherry 

Punjab 

Rajasthan 

Tamil Nadu 

Uttar Pradesh 

Uttarakhand 

West Bengal 

All India 

*Provisional, Source: Cooperative sugar: Vol.44 (4), December 2012 
Annexure XXVII 
STATE WISE AVERAGE SUGAR RECOVERY PERCENT CANE IN INDIA 
S. No.
State
2006-07
2007-08
2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
2011-12* 
1. 
Andhra Pradesh 
9.70 
10.12 
9.89 
9.28 
9.75 
9.79 
2. 
Assam 
3. 
Bihar 
8.67 
9.24 
9.04 
9.49 
9.30 
9.45 
4. 
Chhattisgarh 
7.62 
9.00 
8.43 
7.82 
8.72 
8.21 
5. 
Dadra Nagar Haveli 
2.44 
6. 
Goa 
9.57 
9.87 
8.72 
8.17 
8.66 
9.02 
7. 
Gujarat 
10.64 
10.67 
10.72 
10.53 
9.99 
10.61 
8. 
Haryana 
9.75 
9.87 
9.05 
9.37 
9.01 
9.10 
9. 
Karnataka 
10.57 
10.87 
10.28 
10.67 
10.91 
11.14 
10. 
Kerala 
11. 
Madhya Pradesh 
9.29 
9.54 
9.62 
9.40 
9.66 
9.69 
12. 
Maharashtra 
11.39 
11.92 
11.44 
11.51 
11.29 
11.65 
13. 
Nagaland 
14. 
Orissa 
9.74 
9.51 
9.44 
9.01 
8.70 
8.89 
15. 
Pondicherry 
8.31 
8.78 
10.02 
8.30 
8.64 
8.86 
16. 
Punjab 
9.55 
9.26 
9.29 
8.59 
8.80 
9.13 
17. 
Rajasthan** 
9.04 
7.05 
8.82 
7.80 
7.73 
7.66 
18. 
Tamil Nadu 
9.25 
9.32 
9.62 
8.94 
9.09 
9.35 
19. 
Uttar Pradesh 
9.47 
9.79 
8.94 
9.13 
9.14 
9.07 
20. 
Uttarakhand 
9.54 
9.74 
9.20 
9.19 
9.35 
9.10 
21. 
West Bengal 
8.32 
6.43 
6.44 
7.04 
7.18 
8.10 
 
All India 
10.16 
10.55 
10.03 
10.19 
10.17 
10.25 
Provisional, ** includes recovery of sugar % from sugar beet 
 Source: Cooperative sugar: Vol.44 (4), December 2012

Annexure XXVIII 
STATE WISE & SECTOR WISE INSTALLED ANNUAL SUGAR PRODUCTION CAPACITY AND 
UTILISATION OF CAPACITY DURING LAST FIVE YEARS 
S. 
No. 
State 
2007-08 
2008-09 
2009-10 
2010-11 
2011-12* 
1. 
A.P. 
9.3260 
143.20 
9.3260 
63.60 
9.3260 
46.30 
9.5710 
105.10 
1.05540 
107.50 
2. 
Assam 
3. 
Bihar 
69.30 
44.20 
53.30 
79.40 
4.8419 
92.90 
4. 
Chhattisgarh 
0.2230 
171.10 
0.2230 
56.90 
0.2230 
38.70 
0.6690 
34.90 
0.6900 
51.80 
5. 
DN&H 
0.1950 
6. 
Goa 
157.20 
101.10 
87.30 
135.70 
0.1175 
88.80 
7. 
Gujrat 
10.7922 
126.60 
10.7922 
93.80 
10.7922 
110.20 
11.3034 
109.30 
12.3710 
80.90 
8. 
Haryana 
3.3572 
111.80 
5.7092 
40.10 
5.7092 
43.50 
5.7092 
68.60 
5.1480 
95.90 
9. 
Karnataka 
17.6570 
164.30 
19.4746 
84.80 
20.4844 
124.90 
21.1576 
174.10 
28.3540 
136.60 
10. 
Kerala 
11. 
M.P. 
1.6562 
105.00 
1.9907 
30.20 
2.5036 
32.00 
2.5036 
65.60 
2.7610 
57.50 
12. 
Maharashtra 
71.6109 
126.70 
72.6974 
63.00 
75.3032 
93.80 
78.3433 
115.60 
84.8280 
105.80 
13. 
Nagaland 
14. 
Orissa 
62.30 
30.30 
22.20 
44.30 
0.8268 
78.60 
15. 
Puducherry 
132.00 
43.30 
48.60 
123.20 
0.3930 
162.30 
16. 
Punjab 
6.8423 
78.00 
6.8423 
35.40 
6.8423 
26.50 
7.1913 
42.00 
4.7395 
82.30 
17. 
Rajasthan 
25.50 
16.00 
16.30 
16.20 
0.2335 
9.40 
18. 
Tamil Nadu 
16.9712 
126.10 
17.5214 
91.20 
19.0934 
67.10 
19.0934 
96.70 
23.1680 
102.70 
19. 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
73.2583 
99.90 
74.2543 
54.70 
74.7191 
69.30 
74.7191 
78.80 
66.0557 
105.60 
20. 
Uttarakhand 
4.1168 
97.30 
4.1168 
54.10 
4.1882 
69.70 
4.1882 
72.20 
3.2240 
102.80 
21. 
West Bengal 
0.0670 
68.90 
0.1414 
13.40 
0.1414 
14.60 
0.1414 
35.30 
0.1617 
28.20 
 
All India 
224.8028 
117.20 
230.0140 
63.20 
236.2507 
80.00 
241.7102 
90.90 
248.4676 
106.00 
*Provisional Source: Cooperative sugar: Vol.44 (4), December 2012

Annexure XXIX 
STATE WISE SUGAR PRODUCTION (‘000 ton) DURING LAST 10 YEARS 
 
Sl.
No 
State 
2002-

2003-

2004-

2005-

2006-

2007-

2008-
09* 
2009-

2010-

2011-
12* 

A.P. 

Assam

Bihar 

Chhattisgarh

Goa 

Gujarat

Haryana

Karnataka

Kerala 

M.P. 

Maharashtra

Nagaland 

Orissa

Puducherry

Punjab

Rajasthan

Tamilnadu

U.P. 

Uttarakhand 

W.B. 

All India
20145 
13456
12691 
19267 
28364
26357 
14539
18912
24394 
26343 
 
 
 
 
 
* Provisional 
Source: Cooperative sugar: Vol.44 (4), December 2012

Annexure-XXX 
EXPORT- IMPORT OF SUGAR ON FINANCIAL YEAR BASIS FROM 2000-01 ONWARDS 
(AS PER DGCI & S, KOLKATA) 
Financial year 
(April to March) 
EXPORT 
IMPORT 
Quantity 
(Tonnes) 
Value (Rs./ 
Crores) 
Quantity 
(Tonnes) 
Value 
(Rs./ 
Crores) 
2000-01 
338691 
430.98 
30404 
31.11 
2001-02 
1456448 
1728.29 
26578 
32.60 
2002-03 
1662370 
1769.49 
41430 
32.83 
2003-04 
1200600 
1216.59 
74400 
62.70 
2004-05 
108690 
149.53 
932740 
976.18 
2005-06 
321204 
569.11 
558769 
651.59 
2006-07 
1643403 
3127.47 

3.49 
2007-08 
4684554 
5412.16 

2.24 
2008-09 
3331997 
4448.74 
386099 
583.11 
2009-10 
44045 
110.23 
2424045 
5961.24 
2010-11 
3249300 
10352.27 
1004100 
2723.21 
2011-12 (Up to 
September, 11) 
2717300 
8736.15 
70454 
209.64 
Source: Cooperative Sugar, vol-44, No.4, Dec, 2012. 
 
Annexure-XXXI 
STATE WISE RATE OF CESS/ PURCHASE TAX ON SUGARCANE PAID BY SUGAR FACTORIES 
 
S. 
No. 
State 
Cess/ Purchase tax in Rupees per tonne cane 
2010-11 
2011-12 
1. 
Andhra Pradesh 
60.00 
60.00 
2. 
Bihar 
17.50 
17.50 
3. 
Gujrat 
2 % on cane price paid 
2 % on cane price paid 
4. 
Haryana 
15.00 
15.00 
5. 
Karnataka 
65.00 for factories with 10.50 % and above 
recovery + 10 road cess. 50.00 for factories with 
recovery below 10.50 % + 10 road cess. 
65.00 for factories with 10.50 % and above 
recovery + 10 road cess. 50.00 for factories 
with recovery below 10.50 % + 10 road cess. 
6. 
Kerala 
4.6 % 
4.6 % 
7. 
Madhya Pradesh 
4.5 % + 1 % Mandi tax 
4.5 % + 1 % Mandi tax 
8. 
Maharashtra 
3 % ad velorem 
3 % ad velorem 
9. 
Punjab 
5.5 % VAT + 5.00 cess 
5.5 % VAT + 5.00 cess 
10. 
Rajasthan 
2 % ad velorem 
2 % ad velorem 
11. 
Tamil Nadu 
60.00 + 5.00 cess 
60.00 + 5.00 cess 
12. 
Uttar Pradesh 
13. 
Uttarakhand

Annexure-XXXII
Progress report of Sugarcane Development Scheme under Macro Management 
 Mode on Agriculture (MMMA) for the year 2011-12 
Rs. In Lakh 

Gujrat (MMMA)
March, 2012 (Rs. In Lakhs) 
 
 
Unit 
 Target 
Physical 
Financial 
 
 
 
Physical 
Financial 
Achv. 
Achv. 

Field demonstration 

1.50 

1.50

Seed Multiplication 
 
 
 
 
 
a. Foundation nursery 

4.00 

4.00
 
b. Primary nursery 

4.00 

3.92

Trainings 
 
 
 
 
 
a. Farmers training 

1.00 

0.90
 
b. State level training 

0.40 

0.00

Supply of drip irrigation 
infrastructure 
Ha. 

18.00 
59.22
17.77

INM ( supply of Organic manure) 
Ha. 

64.00 

57.06

IPM (supply of Tricoderma culture) 
Ha. 

14.40 

11.23
 
Total
 
 
107.30 
 
96.38

Maharashtra 
March, 2012 (Rs. In Lakhs) 
A
Approved Component

Field Demonstration 

712.50 
10269
751.32

Multiplication of Planting 
material (Seed Production 
Programme) 
 
 
 
 
 
Foundation seed 
ha 

72.00 

53.35
Certified seed 
 
18000
360.00 
16978
341.05

Human Resource Develop.Prog. 
 
 
 
 
 
Extension worker/officers training 

7.60 

7.77
Farmers visit 

20.00 

23.00

Supply of Micronutrients 
 
 
 
 
 
Distrubution of Micronutrients 
27998
279.98 
29612
287.45
Distrubution ofGypsum 
25000
250.00 
22003
218.79
c
Green mannuring /Decomposting 
Sugarcane Trash 

90.00 
11437
94.31

New initiatives 
 
 
 
 
 
Farmer’s field School(FFS) 

41.48 

41.63
Tractor/ power drawn 

150.00 
12980
121.75
 
Total
 
1983.56 
1940.42

Odisha 
March, 2012 (Rs. In Lakhs) 
 
 
Unit 
 Target 
Physical 
Financial 
 
 
 
Physical 
Financial 
Achv. 
Achv. 

Farmers Field School 

State level trainings 
Ha. 

0.20 

0.20

Technology Demonstration 

135.00 

135.00

Intercropping demonstration 

10.32 

10.32

Seed Multiplication 
Ac. 

8.00 

8.00

Distribution of seed cane 
Ac. 

 
 
 
177.52 
 
177.52
4. UIttrakhand 
March – 2012 (Rs in Lakhs) 

Field Demonstration 

2.25 

2.25

Seed Multiplication 

0.69 
17.25
0.69

Tractor Driven Implement 

14.46 

18.15

Bullock Driven Implement 

6.00 

5.92

State level Training 

0.40 

0.40

Farmer’s level Training 

1.20 

1.20
 
 
 
25.00 
28.61
Balance of last year Rs. 3.84 lakh (Rs. 25.00+3.84 = 28.84 Lakhs) is used in 2011-12 

Chhattishgarh 
March 2012 (Rs in Lakhs)

Demonstration of technology 
(0.5ha) 

13.50 

11.67 

Seed/ Planting material 
multiplication for foundation 
nursury 
Ha. 

1.00 

0.16 

Farmers training 

3.40 

3.40 

Visit of farmers to model farms, 
institute 

3.50 

3.50 

Contingencies & POL 
 
 
1.60 
 
1.50 
 
 
 
23.00 
 
20.23 

Karnataka 
 
March 2012 (Rs in Lakhs)

Large scale demonstrations of 
technology 

225.00 

225.36 

Demo on ratoon management 
ha 

150.00 

156.30 

Sugarcane demonstration using 
single eye bud. 

15.00 

2.48 

Multiplication & distribution of 
Sugarcane sets. 

10.00 

7.80 
 
 
 
400.00
 
391.94

7 MIZORUM 
 
March 2012 (Rs in Lakhs)
 
Physical 
Financial 
Physical 
Financial 
 
 
Unit 
 Target 
Achv. 
Achv. 

Demonstration of technology 

4.5 
4.5

Multiplication of planting material 
of HYV cane setts 

5.5 
5.5

Trainings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a. Farmers training 
No 

2.6 
2.6
 
b. State level 
No 

0.4 
0.4

Monitoring/ Inspection/ Visit 
preparation of report/ P.O.L. as 
contengency 
No 

Total

8 Bihar 
March 2012 (Rs in Lakhs)

Farmers training 

60.00 

54.85

Transfer of technology 
 
 
40.50 
39.50
 
Total
 
 
100.50 
94.34
9. Madhya Pradesh 
1. 
Field Demonstration 

3.75 
28.00
1.99

Seed Multiplication 

5.00 
47.00
0.86

Drip Irrigation 

1.50 
1.00
0.30

Micro nutrient subsidy 

610.00
2.35

MHAT Plant 

2.00
6.00

Treatment of Planting material 

225.00
0.28

Farmers visit 

2.5 
2.00
1.00

Tissue culture 
40000
0.5 
0.00
0.00

Breeder seed 

0.5 
1.00
0.25

Contingencies & video conference 
 
 
8.25 
0.00
2.32
 
Total
 
 
40.00 
15.35
 
Grand Total 
 
 
2871.88 
2779.79
Based on Progress Report received from State department.

Annexure-XXXIII 
STATEMENT SHOWING THE MINIMUM STATUTORY PRICE/ FAIR & REMUNERATIVE 
PRICE OF SUGARCANE FIXED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Year 
Minimum 
Statutory price 
of 
Sugarcane 
(Rs. 
Per 
quintal) 
Linked to basic 
sugar 
recovery 
% cane 
Premium on every 
0.1% 
increase 
in 
sugar recovery % 
cane 
(Rs. 
Per 
quintal) 
Range of Minimum 
Sugarcane Price on 
the basis of Col. 1, 2 
& 3 (Rs. Per quintal) 
2000- 01 
59.50 
0.70 
59.50 to 96.60 
2001- 02 
62.05 
0.73 
62.05 to 100.74 
2002- 03 
69.50 
0.82 
69.50 to 113.78 
2003- 04 
73.00 
0.85 
73.00 to 118.90 
2004- 05 
74.50 
0.88 
74.50 to 110.58 
2005- 06 
79.50 
0.88 
79.50 to 112.94 
2006- 07 
80.25 
0.90 
80.26 to 119.85 
2007- 08 
81.18 
0.90 
81.18 to 118.98 
2008- 09 
81.18 
0.90 
81.18 to 123.48 
2009- 10 
129.84 (FRP) 
1.37 
129.84 to 179.16 
2010-11 
139.12(FRP) 
1.46 
139.12 to 197.52 
2011- 12 
145.00 (FRP) 
1.53 
145.00 to 203.14 
2012-13 
170 (FRP) 
1.79 
NA 
Source: Cooperative Sugar Vol. 44 (4) December 2012