Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India iii
Background
SSI
Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India
Training Manual
An Initiative of 
ICRISAT-WWF Project
S
u
s
t
n
b
l
e
 
S
u
g
r
c
n
e
 
I
n
t
t
v
e

Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative (SSI)
Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 
Training Manual
March 2009 
Acknowledgment:
This manual has been produced as part of the ICRISAT-WWF project ‘Producing More 
Food Grain with Less Water: Promoting farm-based methods to improve the water 
productivity’. Our sincere thanks to Dr. William Dar, Director General, ICRISAT and 
Dr. Dave Hoisington, Deputy Director General-Research, ICRISAT for their valuable 
support. We thank Dr. Shashi Bhushan, Dr. Vijay Kumar and Mr. Suresh of ANGRAU, 
Dr. Rajendra Prasad (Sugarcane Breeding Institute, Coimbatore), Mr. P. K. Singh (Triveni 
Sugars, UP) and Mr. Prabhakar Reddy, Mr. Panduranga Reddy, Mr. Alwara Swamy, the SSI 
trainers and farmers from AP for their valuable inputs in bringing out this publication. 
We also thank the senior cane ofﬁ cers from Triveni Sugars, Uttar Pradesh and farmers 
from Punjab, Orissa and Karnataka who underwent training on the SSI methods at the 
ICRISAT campus and sugarcane ﬁ elds of progressive farmers in Andhra Pradesh. 
The manual has been compiled by:
Dr. Biksham Gujja, Dr. N. Loganandhan, Dr. V. Vinod Goud, Ms. Manisha Agarwal and 
Mr. Sraban Dalai
Photographs: 
WWF team, Mr. L. Vidyasagar, Mr. Prabhakar Reddy, Mr. Vijay Kumar, Dr. Shashi Bhushan 
and Mr. Alwara Swamy
Design and Layout:
Akshakala 
Copies can be obtained from:
ICRISAT - WWF Project
ICRISAT, Patancheru – 502 324
Andhra Pradesh, India
Tel: +91 40 3071 3762
Email: p.reddy@cgiar.org 
Note:
The information in the manual has been produced after extensive research and 
veriﬁ cation by ICRISAT-WWF project team with support of highly acclaimed sugarcane 
farmers, experts, institutes, agencies and practical experiences. However we would 
appreciate critical comments or additional information concerning the contents of 
this manual.

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 1
Background
S
u
s
t
n
b
l
e
 
S
u
g
r
c
n
e
 
I
n
t
t
v
e
Foreword ........................................................................................................................3
Preface ............................................................................................................................4
Background ................................................................................................7
Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative (SSI): An Introduction .....11
Step-wise Guide to SSI Practices ..................................................15
Pit System of Planting .......................................................................25
Ratoon Management in Sugarcane .............................................27
Summary .................................................................................................29
Annexure .................................................................................................30
C o n t e n t s

2 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 3
Foreword
Water is increasingly becoming a major limiting factor for agriculture, especially where irrigated crops 
and dry land agriculture are intermixed. Often in the same watershed, both irrigated crops such as 
rice and sugarcane exist with dry land crops such as sorghum and millets. In such circumstances, the 
impact of irrigated crops on dry land agriculture is signiﬁ cant, particularly in semi-arid regions, where 
irrigation is primarily based on ground water exploitation, leading to decline in soil moisture and 
seriously reducing the productivity. Further, the erratic trends in rainfall add to the growing complexity 
of the water issues. Thus, we need to explore every possible approach to reduce the water input to all 
crops, particularly those which excessively depend on scarce resources. Any water reduction to thirsty 
crops such as sugarcane will have a positive impact on the dry land agriculture in the same region. 
To improve productivity and protect the ecosystem, an integrated approach to agriculture involving 
all stakeholders is essential in tackling pressing issues such as the decline in productivity, ground 
water table, soil moisture and the uncertainty of monsoons, all of which are interlinked. On one 
hand, watershed management can improve the water resources in basins, but on the other hand, 
until and unless that water is used more productively, the investments will not yield results. 
In order to understand and address the water issues in a holistic way, the International Crops Research 
Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) entered into a partnership with the World Wide Fund for 
Nature (WWF). The joint project on ‘Improving the water productivity of the agriculture’ is researching 
non-traditional and out-of-the-box approaches wherein the resource inputs are low and yields are 
high. The Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative (SSI) is one such approach that could reduce the inputs - 
water, fertilizer, seed material - while improving sugarcane production signiﬁ cantly. This farm-based 
approach gives farmers options to grow intercrops such as pulses to improve their income, while 
effectively using the soil moisture to grow dry land crops. This manual describes, step-wise, how to 
put SSI in to practice. It has been developed following extensive consultations with farmers and is 
very user friendly. It will be translated soon into several Indian languages so that farmers can use 
and beneﬁ t from this new method. 
I am delighted that the ICRISAT-WWF partnership is working on solutions to address the water crisis 
without compromising on agricultural production. The WWF, with its main mandate of protecting 
the ecosystems, is working with a vision that the methods like SSI will help in producing more while 
reducing the ecological foot print of agriculture. Similarly, ICRISAT is collaborating with WWF to 
understand and integrate the ecological concerns of agriculture. This partnership is unique and we 
are looking forward to many more practical results on the ground. This manual is one such attempt. 
I do hope farmers and researchers will be able to use it effectively to address the pressing issues of 
sugarcane production in general and the water crisis in particular. 
William D. Dar
Director General
ICRISAT

4 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
Farmers cultivating sugarcane are facing multiple problems. Water is one of the major constraints 
and it is affecting the productivity and proﬁ tability of sugarcane growers and millers. The problem 
is going to further deteriorate due to variability of rainfall inﬂ uenced by climate change. So, unless 
sugarcane farmers are provided with options of high yields with much less water, India will ﬁ nd it 
difﬁ cult to meet its growing demand for sugar.
Sugarcane is an important crop in India. There are 35 million farmers growing sugarcane and another 
50 million depend on employment generated by the 571 sugar factories and other related industries 
using sugar. In Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, sugarcane plays a major role in the state 
economy. 
During the last 10 years, sugarcane production in India has been ﬂ uctuating between 233 million 
tonnes and 355 million tonnes. Similarly, the productivity at the farm level is as low as 40 t/ha. 
With such low yields and ﬂ uctuations in production, and India having the second largest area under 
sugarcane cultivation in the world next to Brazil, the industry is in for big trouble. 
The Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative (SSI) aims at providing practical options to farmers in improving 
the productivity of land, water and labour, all at the same time. In addition, it reduces crop duration 
and provides factories a much longer period of crushing season and hence increasing employment 
to a longer period of time. SSI is also expected to reduce the overall pressure on water resources and 
contribute to recovery of ecosystems.
It is important to mention here a few things about SSI and this manual. This is a farm based method 
and farmers have the option to use the variety of their choice. The SSI is a package of practices 
based on the principles of ‘more with less’ in agriculture. The inspiration for putting this package 
together is from the successful approach of SRI- System of Rice Intensiﬁ cation. SSI is another 
practical approach that originated from farmers and the civil society to improve productivity while 
reducing the pressure on natural resources. This will contribute to reducing the human footprint on 
planet earth. 
This is a step-wise manual. The practices mentioned in the manual did exist here and there in a 
small way. Most of these practices were innovated and improvised by the farmers. Our contribution 
is to put all of them together after extensive consultation with farmers. By no means is this a 
comprehensive compilation of the farm based practices. There are many more, and we are in the 
process of collecting them, testing and improvising to suite the local conditions. This process will 
continue. So this manual is a ﬁ rst attempt and we do hope we will be coming together with more 
Preface

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 5
options to improve the sugarcane production in future. Our aim is to make sugarcane cultivation 
simple, affordable and proﬁ table for both the small and big farmer and the industry. 
We also hope the practices prescribed in this manual will be adopted based on the local agro-
climatic conditions. We are aware of the difﬁ culties in prescribing certain things. For example, we 
suggest to the farmers to totally adopt organic methods to improve the quality of sugarcane and 
the soil. While that is our recommended practice, farmers may opt for the more pragmatic approach 
- gradually reducing the inputs and building the soil fertility through various methods. Similarly, 
practicing SSI using drip irrigation will save water up to 80%, but that requires capital costs. So 
we expect ﬁ nancial institutions to play a role in providing the credit at affordable rates as part of 
improving the production and saving water in large quantities. Farmers need some incentives and 
support to switch to drip irrigation. 
We estimate that by adopting SSI, a farmer will be able to produce at least 20% more sugarcane 
while reducing 30% of water input and 25% of chemical inputs. There is no other proven method 
available today which can do both - reducing water pressure while improving the productivity. 
In addition, SSI will also offer an opportunity for farmers to grow another short duration crop in 
between the rows to get additional income. Sugarcane millers will have the opportunity to use their 
machinery and human resources in a much more productive way to improve their proﬁ tability.
By the end of 2009, we will be revising this manual and producing it in many local languages with the 
help of partners. By then we will have a lot more data based on demonstration sites we are establishing 
using the SSI method. We will be incorporating the experiences to ﬁ ne tune this method. 
The current crisis in agriculture is great opportunity. As part of adapting to the climate-induced 
uncertainties, the agriculture sector needs to take advantage of the farm based methods to improve 
productivity. The SRI in rice and SSI in sugarcane have proved the potential of addressing the water 
crisis while improving the productivity and proﬁ tability. India needs to invest in these methods to 
upscale to see the full positive impact of such approaches at the national level. It is also time for civil 
society, government agencies to work together to support the farmers in adopting these methods 
in a big way.
Dr. Biksham Gujja
Team Leader ICRISAT-WWF project

6 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
In India, sugar is a Rs. 30,000 crore 
industry, the second largest in the 
country in the agro-processing sector, 
next only to Textiles, and represents the 
principle livelihood of 35 million farmers.

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 7
Background
C
elebrations without sweets and cakes and a cup of coffee or tea without sugar are unthinkable. 
Sugar which adds sweetness to our life is extracted from the juice of the sugarcane. The 
thick stalks of canes store energy as sucrose in the sap. The cultivation of sugarcane dates back 
to the Vedic period. The most ancient reference to sugarcane is in `Athervaveda’ which is 5000 
years old, and the word ‘sugar’ is derived from the Sanskrit word Sankkara/Sarkara. In the 1400 
- 1500 AD in India, cows belonging to the Sultan of Mandu were fed with sugarcane for weeks 
to make their milk sweet for use in puddings. 
Different species of sugarcane likely originated in different locations with Saccharum barberi 
originating in India and S. edule and S. ofﬁ cinarum coming from New Guinea. The ﬁ rst sugar 
mill in India was established in Bengal on the banks of river Hoogly in the year 1784. By 1994 - 
1995, India had about 408 mills in operation with an average crushing capacity of 2452 tonnes 
(t) per day and a crushing duration of 161 days. By March 2005, the total number of sugar 
factories in India were 571. 
Today, India ranks second in the world, after Brazil, in terms of area (4.1 m.ha) and sugarcane 
production (355 million tonnes in the year 2007). 
In India, sugar is a Rs. 30,000 crore industry, the second largest in the country in the agro-
processing sector, next only to textiles, and represents the principle livelihood of 35 million 
farmers. Apart from this, sugarcane is in great demand for various other uses like fodder, 
paper production and most importantly bio-fuels. In a typical sugar mill, 100 t of sugarcane 
on an average produces 10 t of sugar, 4 t of molasses from which ethanol is produced, 3 t 
of press mud which is converted into bio-fertilizer, 30 t of bagasse used for cogeneration of 
power to yield 1,500 kw electricity and for manufacturing paper. Besides, about 30 t of cane 
tops and leaves are generally left in the ﬁ eld, which through recycling further adds to the 
economic value of the crop.
India ranks second 
in the world, after 
Brazil, in terms of 
area (4.1 m.ha) 
and sugarcane 
production (355 
million tonnes in the 
year 2007).
There is a growing 
demand for sugar 
in India as it is 
the largest sugar 
consuming country 
in the world (around 
20 million tonnes in 
the year 2007-08). 
Crystal sugar

Andhra Pradesh
Area (‘0000 ha)
Production (MT)
Productivity (t/ha)
Assam
Bihar
Gujarat
Haryana
Karnataka
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Orissa
Punjab
Tamil Nadu
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal
Source: Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture
State-wise Area, Production and Productivity of Sugarcane in India (2006-07)

8 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
There is a growing demand for sugar in India as it is the largest sugar consuming country in the 
world (around 20 million tonnes in the year 2007-08). 
Sugarcane in India is grown in two distinct agro-climatic regions – the Tropical (largely comprising 
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu) and the Sub-tropical (Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, 
Haryana and Bihar). 
Among the states, Uttar Pradesh occupies half (2.25 m.ha) of the total area followed by 
Maharashtra (1.04 m.ha). Though UP dominates in production with 134 MT followed by 
Maharashtra with 79 MT, in terms of productivity, Tamil Nadu leads with 105 t/ha followed by 
Karnataka (88 t/ha) and Andhra Pradesh (82 t/ha). 
Yet despite its long tradition and large area in India, in terms of productivity, sugarcane yields 
are unimpressive, especially where the crop is irrigated. The average productivity of sugarcane 
is low with certain regions reporting yields as low as 40 t/ha only. Not only is the cane yield 
low, the sugar yield - typically at less than 10% of cane weight - is also less than satisfactory 
Sugar factory
Traditional Jaggery making
Sugarcane dependent livelihoods
Despite long 
tradition and large 
area in India, the 
average productivity 
of sugarcane is low 
with certain regions 
reporting yields as 
low as 40 t/ha only.

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 9
Background
Sugarcane research ﬁ eld
given that yields of 14% of cane weight at the time of cutting (and 
sometimes much higher) are possible. The Australian sugar industry 
for instance is regularly typiﬁ ed by sugar yields of around 14%, 
while yields of up to 25 tonnes of sugar per hectare have been 
reported in Hawaii! 
Sugarcane cultivation and the sugar industry in India are facing 
serious challenges due to various internal and external factors. 
The reasons for such low productivity are:
• The improved varieties released by research organizations 
perform well in the initial years but lose their vigour and decline 
in yield in due course.
• Water availability is unpredictable. The concern is not only the 
quantity of water required, but also the lack of proper water 
management practices. Due to this, water is either wasted or 
sometimes not available at the right time.
A recent FAO 
report predicts 
sharp shortfall of 
sugar production in 
India in the 
year 2009. 

China
Million tonnes
India
Thailand
USA
Brazil
EU
Australia
2008 estimate
2009 forecast
Source: Food Outlook, Global Market Analysis, Nov. 2008
World Sugar Production Forecast (2008-09)
• Unpredictable climatic aberrations, improper cultivation practices, negligence in plant 
protection measures, imbalanced nutrient management and other practices like mono 
cropping often result in low productivity, fetching low price in the market. 
In addition, it is also very important to consider the enormous amount of water that goes 
into the sugarcane production. Approximately 25,000 kg of water is needed to produce 10 kg 
of sugarcane. But, the water table is depleting every year. Costs of production, moreover, are 
increasing not just for the small farmers but for the large industrial players as well. In future, 
these challenges will become even more complex with climate change inducing direct and 
indirect effects on crops, water, pests and diseases, and volatility in the international market.

10 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
Crushing of canes
SSI is a combination 
of cane planting 
innovations and water 
saving practices.
A recent FAO report predicts sharp shortfall of sugar production in India in the year 2009. On 
one hand, there is the opportunity in terms of growing demand for sugar and other bi-products 
of sugarcane, and on the other hand, there is the decline in production and productivity due 
to various reasons. The rising cost of farm chemicals, along with the increasing social and 
environmental costs of water use by the agricultural sector and the pollution accruing to modern, 
input intensive production practices have begun to raise serious questions in the minds of policy 
makers, planners and farmers alike. Any problem affecting the sugar sector is a widespread 
problem, affecting a signiﬁ cant number of households and ecosystems. The desirability of a 
widely replicable solution is therefore equally obvious. 
This question is already being addressed in the rice sector, with the System of Rice Intensiﬁ cation 
(popularly known as SRI). SRI is an integrated approach that greatly reduces irrigation water 
requirements while producing a range of beneﬁ ts including higher yields, better quality rice, less 
chaff and resistance to lodging.
With this in mind, being very similar conceptually and philosophically, the ongoing ICRISAT - 
WWF project has designed the Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative, SSI in short. SSI is a combination 
of cane planting innovations and water saving practices that has great potential for not 
only meeting the growing demands of sugar sector players looking for increased revenues 
and proﬁ tability, but also for the bigger picture of improved natural resource management, 
reduced environmental footprints and improved livelihoods by means of technologies that are 
appropriate and effective at household farm level. 
If India has to sustain its sugarcane production, it importantly needs to improve the productivity 
of the sugarcane per unit of land, water, labour and capital all at the same time while striking a 
balance between economy and ecology.

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 11
Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative (SSI): An Introduction
S
ustainable Sugarcane Initiative is a method of sugarcane production that involves the use 
of less seeds, less water and optimum utilization of fertilizers and land to achieve more 
yields. Driven by farmers, SSI is an alternative to conventional seed, water and space intensive 
sugarcane cultivation. 
The major principles that govern SSI are:
• Raising nursery using single budded chips.
• Transplanting young seedlings (25-35 days old).
• Maintaining wide spacing (5X2 feet) in the main ﬁ eld.
• Providing sufﬁ cient moisture and avoiding inundation of water.
• Encouraging organic method of nutrient and plant protection measures.
• Practicing intercropping for effective utilization of land.
Raising nursery using single budded chips
In the conventional method, 2-3 budded sugarcane 
setts are used for planting. In SSI, single budded chips, 
carefully removed from healthy canes are used for 
raising nursery. The selected buds are placed in trays 
ﬁ lled with coco-pith (coconut coir waste) to raise 
the seedlings. By raising nursery, high percentage of 
germination can be achieved within a week depending 
on the agro climatic conditions. 
Transplanting young seedlings
The young seedlings raised in the nursery are 
transplanted to the main ﬁ eld at the age of 25 – 35 
days. It is important to note here that this one month 
growth of seedlings achieved under SSI method cannot 
be achieved even after two months in conventional 
method. 
Conventionally, 2-3 budded setts are used
In SSI, single budded chips are used for raising nursery 
Placing buds in the tray
SSI is an alternate 
to conventional 
seed, water and 
space intensive 
sugarcane 
cultivation.

12 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
Young seedling sprouted from a bud chip

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 13
Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative (SSI): An Introduction 
Transplanting at wider spacing
In conventional methods, the distance between two rows is maintained at 45 to 75 cm (1.5-2.5 
ft), and 16,000 three budded setts (48,000 buds) are directly planted in the soil to achieve normal 
population of 44,000 canes per acre. But unfortunately, only 25,000 millable canes are achieved 
at the end. On the other hand, in the SSI method of sugarcane cultivation, wide spacing of 5X2 
feet maintained in the main ﬁ eld leads to 45,000 to 55,000 millable canes because of more 
tillering. So, wider spacing in SSI cultivation not only reduces the seed usage from 16,000 three 
budded setts to 4,000 to 5,000 single buds, but most importantly it also supports easy air and 
sunlight penetration in the crop canopy for better and healthy cane growth. 
Wider spacing between rows
Drip Irrigation
Water management
In SSI water management is another crucial issue. 
It is always emphasized that sufﬁ cient moisture is 
provided rather than inundating the ﬁ eld with water 
as ﬂ ooded condition will actually hinder the growth 
of the plant. Measures like raising of nursery, following 
furrow/alternate 
furrow 
irrigation, 
optimum 
application of water through drip irrigation should 
be followed. So, by giving only required quantity of 
water about 40% of water is saved. 
Organic method of cultivation
The SSI method discourages high application 
of chemical fertilizers and use of pesticides and 
weedicides. Farmers should incorporate more 
organic manures, bio-fertilizers and follow bio-
control measures. The sudden switch over to 
organic cultivation is not advisable. Instead, a 
gradual reduction of inorganic and adoption of 
organic methods can be tried by framers for long 
term beneﬁ ts. 
Application of organic manure
Gradual switching 
from inorganic to 
organic method 
will bring long term 
benefits to farmers.
Wider spacing 
drastically 
reduces the seed 
requirement from 
48,000 buds to 
5,000 buds 
per acre.

14 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
Intercropping
SSI supports intercropping in sugarcane with crops like wheat, potato, cowpea, french bean, 
chickpea, water melon, brinjal etc. In addition to effective utilization of land, this practice will 
reduce the weed growth up to 60% and give extra income to farmers. 
Intercropping with potato
Overall beneﬁ ts
• In conventional method, the cost of setts occupies a major part of the cost of cultivation. 
But by practicing SSI, the seed cost can be drastically reduced up to 75%.
• Reduction in plant mortality rate.
• Increase in the length and weight of individual canes.
• Easy to transport the young seedlings to longer distance.
• Easy intercultural operations because of wider spacing. 
Table 1. Comparison between Conventional and SSI methods of Sugarcane Cultivation
Particulars
Conventional method
SSI method
Seeds/Setts
48,000 buds (16,000 three budded setts/
acre)
5000 buds (5000 single budded chips/acre)
Nursery preparation
No
Yes
Measures to maintain uniformity among 
plants
No Grading
Grading is done during nursery
Planting
Direct planting of setts in the main ﬁ eld
Transplanting of 25-35 days old young seed-
lings raised in a nursery
Spacing
1.5 to 2.5 ft between rows
5 ft between rows
Water requirement
More (ﬂ ooding of ﬁ eld)
Less (maintenance of moisture in the furrows)
Mortality rate among plants
High
Low
No. of tillers per plant
Less (10-15)
More (20-25)
No. of millable canes achieved per clump
4-5
9-10
Accessibility to air and sunlight
Low
High
Scope for intercrop
Less
More
Intercropping 
reduces the weed-
growth (in the 
initial stage), and 
increases the 
farm income.

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 15
Step-wise Guide to SSI Practices 
1. Bud selection 
In SSI method, single budded chips from the healthy mother canes are 
used for raising nursery. The procedure given below has to be followed for 
the selection of healthy buds:
• Select healthy canes of 7 to 9 months old which have good internode 
length (7 to 8 inches) and girth.
• Observe and avoid canes with disease infestation like fungus growth, 
spots etc.
• Cut the required quantity of canes (refer table 2). Farmers who are 
unable to go for immediate chipping of buds may keep the cut canes 
for about a week under shade.
• Remove buds from the selected canes using an implement called Bud 
Chipper (as shown in the picture). The Bud Chipper comprises a handle 
and a cutting blade ﬁ xed on a wooden plank. 
• Keep the cane on the plank and adjust it in such a way that a single bud 
is placed exactly below the cutting blade. When the handle is pressed, 
single bud chip comes off the cane.
• Large number of buds (about 150/hr) can easily be chipped off in this 
way in a short period of time.
• Next, the chipped buds have to be treated with organic or chemical 
solutions. 
While selecting 
buds, avoid 
taking buds 
from extreme 
top and 
3-4 short 
internodes at 
bottom.
Damaged, split 
and sprouted 
buds are to be 
avoided 
while chipping.
Take care to 
cut the chip 
with healthy 
bud placed at 
the center.
Table 2. Details of canes required for 1 acre 
Age of the cane 
No. of potential buds per cane No. of canes required
7-9 months 
10-12 
450-500
Bud Chipper
Bud chips
Cutting single budded chips

16 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
2. Treatment
It is important to treat the buds with various organic or 
chemical solutions before planting to avoid infestation. The 
bud treatment has to be done in the following way:
• Take a tub preferably made of aluminium or plastic.
• Pour 10 litres of water in the tub and dissolve the chemical 
or organic components as shown in table 3.
• Put the bud chips in a plastic or gunny bag and immerse 
the bag in the prepared solution for 10-15 minutes.
• After treatment, the bud chips have to be dried for 2 -3 
hours under shade and then used for nursery plantation. 
Table 3. Treatment solutions for buds (1 acre) 
Chemical 
Organic
Malathion – 20 ml
Trichoderma or Pseudomonas – 500 g
Carbendazim – 5 g 
Cow urine – 1 to 2 litres 
Lime – 100 g
3. Nursery
Young seedlings are raised in the nursery. It is better to 
establish a shade net shed for the purpose of nursery 
management. It is a fully covered structure meant to provide 
shade and create other favourable conditions like warm and 
wind free environment (See Annexure for dimension of 
Shade net shed). 
• For raising the nursery, take-well decomposed coco-pith.
Fill half of each cone in the tray with coco-pith.
• Place the buds ﬂ at or in a slightly slanting position in 
the cones of a tray. Do not press or push it hard. Ensure 
that the bud side faces up ( as shown in the picture with 
caption - Placing buds in half ﬁ lled tray). 
• Cover the bud chips in trays completely with coco-pith.
• After ﬁ lling all the trays, place them one above the other 
and ﬁ nally keep an empty tray upside down at the top. 
About 100 trays (4 sets, each consisting of 25 trays) are to 
be placed together and wrapped tightly with polythene 
sheets. Place small weights on the bundles and keep 
it for 5 to 8 days in the same position to create high 
temperature and humidity.
• Take measures to control termites around the trays by 
drenching the soil with Chlorpyriphos 50 EC (5ml/l) 
Take care to select healthy 
buds while: 
a. Chipping, 
b. Treatment and 
c. Placing in trays.
Covering the buds with coco-pith
Bud treatment helps in 
90% germination.
For 1 acre plot, 5000 
buds, 100 trays (each 
with 50 cones) and 150 
kg coco-pith are sufficient 
to raise nursery.
Placing buds in half ﬁ lled tray

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 17
Step-wise Guide to SSI Practices
and ensure that there are no weeds in and around the 
nursery area.
• Care should be taken to avoid water, air or sunlight 
entering into the trays by tightly covering and keeping 
the bundles in shade net or preferably inside a room. 
Create artiﬁ cial warmth through electric bulbs if 
the climate is too cold. This is the most crucial 
phase of the nursery management. Under proper 
conditions (especially, warm temperature) within 
3 – 5 days, white roots (primodia) will come out and 
shoots will also appear in next 2 to 3 days.
• Either on the 5th or 8th day (based on the climatic 
conditions), all the trays with sprouted buds are to be 
Placing trays one above the other 
Wrapping the trays with polythene sheet
Keeping the trays side by side on the ground
Germinated buds on 5th day

18 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
Deep ploughing of 
10 to 12 inches is 
essential to
facilitate better 
aeration and 
infiltration of water
into the soil.
removed from the polythene sheet and kept side by side in beds 
on the ground (see Annexure for the details on arrangement 
of trays) to facilitate watering and other nursery management 
practices.
• Based on the moisture content of coco-pith, watering to the 
trays (seedlings) has to be initiated in the evenings for the next 
15 days using rose cans. Shoots will start growing strong and 
leaves will start sprouting. After appearance of two leaves, 
application of water can be increased gradually depending on 
moisture level in trays.
• During six leaf stage (about 20 days old seedling), grading of the 
plants has to be done. Stop giving water for a day to loosen the 
coco-pith in the trays, this enables easy lifting up of the young 
seedlings. 
• Plants of similar age (height) can be lifted up and placed in 
one tray. This way grading of plants according to their height is 
achieved and damaged or dead plants can be removed.
4. Main ﬁ eld preparation 
The main ﬁ eld preparation in SSI method is similar to that of 
conventional method. A good land preparation approach should 
involve the following essential steps. 
4.1 Removal of residues 
Main land preparation for sugarcane starts with clearing the preceding 
crop residues. Stubbles are to be collected and removed from the 
ﬁ eld. All residues can be incorporated into soil by a rotavator. 
4.2 Tillage 
Tillage operations through tractor drawn implements are most 
ideal and quick. After one or two initial ploughings, soil must be 
allowed to weather for a week or two before going for further 
tillage operations.
• Tillage operations can be carried out using harrows or rotavator. 
The operations are to be repeated to make the soil bed free from 
clods, weeds and crop residues.
• After tillage operation, the ﬁ eld should be deep ploughed using 
a tractor.
• If the ﬁ eld is uneven, leveling has to be done using a 
tractor operated leveler. While leveling, a gentle slope 
can be maintained to facilitate easy movement of 
irrigation water.
Excess water may 
lead to death of 
shoots. So, give 
less water even while 
using rose cans.
If the coco-pith 
in the cone is 
dry, water can be 
applied. If it is 
sticky application of 
water can 
be delayed.
Tillage operation
Grading of the plants in trays

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 19
Step-wise Guide to SSI Practices
4.3 Addition of organic manures 
The SSI method encourages application of organic manure as 
it enhances the macro and micro nutrient content in the soil in 
an eco friendly way, helps in optimum utilization of some of the 
chemical fertilizers and protects the soil from degradation and 
other hazardous effects. 
• Apply organic manure like FYM/compost/well-decomposed 
press mud (about 8-10 tonnes/acre).
• Quantity of organic manure could be adjusted in such a way as 
to supply 112 kg N/acre through one or more sources depending 
on their N content.
• Trichoderma and Pseudomonas (each 1 kg/acre) and 
Decomposing cultures can be mixed with the organic manures.
This will improve the soil fertility to realize higher yields. 
4.4 Making furrows and ridges 
• Make furrows with a distance of 5 ft in between (see the 
picture).
• Run a sub-soiler attached to the ridger/plough through the 
furrow to loosen the soil. This will support proper incorporation 
of the manure, deep plantation and prevention of lodging. 
5. Transplanting 
The ideal age for transplanting the young seedlings from nursery 
to the main ﬁ eld is 25 to 35 days.
• Stop giving water one day before transplanting. This will loosen 
the coco-pith in cones and help in easy lifting of seedlings for 
transplantation.
• While transplanting to the main ﬁ eld, zigzag method of planting 
(see picture) can be followed to utilize more space and achieve 
maximum tillers.
Organic manure can 
be added before the 
last ploughing. 
Green manure like 
daincha or sunhemp 
can also be raised 
in the field and 
ploughed in situ 
before planting.
Furrows and ridges 
help in proper 
application of 
manure and optimum 
utilization of 
irrigated water.
Application of organic manure
Furrow 1
Furrow 2
Ridge
5 ft
Furrows with a distance of 5 ft
While planting care 
should be taken to 
avoid air gaps.
N
5 ft
2 ft
2 ft
2 ft
Seedlings
Zigzag planting

20 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
• Plant to plant distance of 2 ft has to be maintained for 
easy sunlight penetration and profuse tillering. 
• For better access to sunlight, follow North-South 
direction of planting. However, slope of the ﬁ eld should 
also be taken into consideration.
• Seedlings are to be planted in the moistened soil with a 
gentle thrust.
• To moisten the soil, irrigate the ﬁ eld one or two days 
before transplanting. Similarly, irrigation should be given 
immediately after planting. The water will ﬂ ow and 
ﬁ ll the air gaps around the plant, if soil compaction is 
not proper.
• It is important to irrigate the ﬁ eld with minimum 
quantity of water instead of ﬂ ooding.
• After the establishment of plants, the mother shoot 
may be cut to get even tillers. Plant should be cut just 
one inch above the ground with a revolving scissor (see 
picture). This will ensure more number of tillers and 
millable canes per plant. It is better to try this practice in 
a smaller area initially and extend further based on the 
success rate. 
6. Weeding 
A weed-free environment is absolutely essential for efﬁ cient 
intake of nutrients. This can be achieved by: 
• Deep ploughing and removal of perennial weeds.
• Hand weedings and mechanical weedings (30, 60 and 90 
days after planting) are better for long term beneﬁ ts.
• Appropriate other measures to control the weeds should 
be practiced to minimize the production loss. 
7. Mulching 
Trash mulching is important in sugarcane cultivation 
as it helps in checking the weeds and providing needed 
moisture. 
• Mulching will develop earthworms which in turn will 
improve the soil aeration and inﬁ ltration of water. 
• Sugarcane trash can be applied @ 1.5 t/acre within 3 
days of planting. Similarly, after detrashing the removed 
leaves can be applied in the interspaces as mulch. 
The time of cutting the 
mother shoot may vary 
from 3 to 30 days after 
planting, depending on 
climatic conditions and
growth of the plants.
Water has to be given 
before cutting the mother 
shoot to prevent fungus 
infection.
Flooding the field with 
excess water will damage 
the transplanted seedlings.
Revolving scissor used for cutting mother shoot
Mulching is the best 
practice to control weeds.
Trash mulching

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 21
Step-wise Guide to SSI Practices
8. Fertilizer application 
Nutrient management in sugarcane cultivation is very essential 
for crop growth. 
• It is always better to know the required quantity of nutrients 
through soil testing and enrich the soil accordingly. If there is 
no facility for that, then NPK can be applied at the rate of 112 
kg, 25 kg and 48 kg per acre, respectively through inorganic or 
organic methods.
• Inorganic fertilizers like Urea, Super Phosphate, Muriate of 
Potash and Ammonium Sulphate are applied to achieve the 
above mentioned nutrient requirement.
• It is observed that by practicing appropriate cultivation 
practices like wider spacing, mulching and earthing up, the 
required quantity of NPK can be achieved by applying optimum 
or less quantity of these fertilizers.
• The recommended quantity of fertilizers can be applied in 2 to 
3 split doses for the efﬁ cient utilization by plants.
• Further, by applying organic manures at the time of ﬁ eld 
preparation and incorporation of green manures into the 
soil, sufﬁ cient quantity of nutrients can be supplied for 
plant growth.In addition, application of bio-fertilizers like 
Azospirillum and Phosphobacteria, 2 kg each on 30th and 60th 
day after planting by mixing it with FYM (200 kg/acre) would 
also improve the crop growth. This can be applied in the sides 
of furrows and incorporated into the soil while earthing up. 
9.Water management 
It is always better to provide sufﬁ cient quantity of water on time 
rather than ﬂ ooding the ﬁ eld with enormous amount of water.
• In conventional ﬂ ooding method water is always applied more 
than the biological demand of the crop which may affect the 
crop growth.
• After transplantation, the frequency of the irrigation may 
differ depending on the soil type, age of the crop, rainfall and 
moisture availability. For sandy soil, the frequency will be more 
and for clay soil it will be less.
• Give irrigation once in 10 days during tillering stage (36-100 
days), once in 7 days during Grand Growth period (101-270 
days) and once in 15 days during Maturity period (from 271 
days till harvest).
It is essential to 
apply micronutrients 
like iron, zinc, 
manganese, copper,
molybdenum 
and boron after 
considering their 
deficiency in the soil.
Fertilizer application
Drip irrigation
Water requirement 
for sugarcane 
records an average 
of 1500 mm (i.e. 60 
lakh litres/acre for 
full season) including 
rainfall, to produce 
100 t millable 
canes. However, in 
conventional method 
of flood irrigation, 
2000 mm (80 
lakh litres/acre) of 
water is applied by 
irrigation alone.

22 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
• Furrow irrigation helps in proper application and saving of water. 
Alternate furrow irrigation means irrigating the furrows of odd 
numbers initially followed by irrigating the furrows of even 
numbers after 7 to 15 days as per the moisture content and age 
of the crop. This will ensure saving of water up to 50%.
• Drip irrigation can be practiced effectively in SSI due to wider 
spacing and raising of single seedlings. Farmers who wish to 
adopt drip irrigation can contact the concerned ﬁ rms and install 
them in their ﬁ elds. 
10. Earthing up 
Earthing up means application of soil at the root zone to strengthen 
the crop stand.
• Normally two earthing up’s (partial and full) are followed during 
a crop period. 
• Partial earthing up is done after ﬁ rst top dressing essentially 
to cover the fertilizer and to provide anchorage to the freshly 
developed roots. In this case, little soil from either side of the 
Providing sufﬁ cient moisture
Furrow and alternate
furrow irrigation can 
be followed to save 
water up to 50%.
In drip system, 
irrigation efficiency 
improves up to 90%, 
water is saved up 
to 40-70% and 
consumption of 
electricity is 
also reduced.
In SSI, about 5 
irrigations can 
be saved as the 
Germination period 
(up to 35 days) is 
spent in nursery.
Earthing up
Earthing up helps in: 
1. Sufficient 
 
anchorage, 
2. Prevention of 
 
lodging, 
3. Covering of 
 
applied fertilizers, 
4. Better root 
 
development, 
5. Checking further 
 
tillering and 
6. Providing better 
 
aeration.

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 23
Step-wise Guide to SSI Practices
furrow is taken and placed over the fertilizer band. This can 
also be done by using a bullock drawn implement or a country 
plough.
• Full earthing up is done after second top dressing (coinciding 
with peak tillering). In this operation soil from the ridge is 
thrown on both the sides towards furrows and these furrows 
will become ridges and vice versa. The newly formed furrows 
will be later used for irrigation. 
11. Detrashing 
Detrashing means removal of excess and unproductive leaves from 
the plants.
• Sugarcane produces large number of leaves. A normal stalk, on 
an average, bears 30-35 leaves under good growing conditions. 
But, for effective photosynthesis, only the top 8-10 leaves are 
sufﬁ cient. Most of the bottom leaves would not participate in 
the process and eventually dry. But, they would compete for 
the nutrients which otherwise could be used for stalk growth. 
Therefore, it is important to remove the lower dry and green 
leaves during the 5th and 7th month, and applied as mulch in the 
interspaces. 
12. Propping 
Propping means giving support to the canes to avoid lodging. 
Normally it is done by tying the canes with leaves. 
• In conventional method, propping is done in the 7th month 
either by tying the canes in each row or by bringing the canes 
of two rows together and tying.
• In SSI, it is recommended to provide a fence like wooden structure 
at one side of the ﬁ eld in order to give support to the lodging 
crops. In this way, tying of adjacent middle leaves can be avoided 
and thus making those leaves effectively contribute to the crop 
growth and saving of labour. 
13. Plant protection 
Like every crop, sugarcane should also be protected from pests and 
diseases. Following are some of the major pests and diseases and 
their control measures: 
Early Shoot borer:
• Trash mulching along with good water management and light 
earthing up at 35th day.
• Release of 50 fertilized Sturmiopsis parasite/acre when the crop 
is at the age of 45-60 days. 
Detrashing helps in: 
1. Clean cultivation, 
2. Easy movement of 
air into the crop 
canopy, 
3. Reduction in 
pests, 
4. Easy intercultural 
operations and,
5. Detrashed 
leaves can be 
used in mulching 
or compost 
preparation.
Detrashing
Propping
Symptom of Early shoot borer attack

24 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
Internode borer:
• Distribution of cards pasted with eggs of Trichogramma chilonis 
@ 10 cards/acre, at 20 meters distance when the crop is 4-11 
months old.
• Pheromone traps (@ 10/acre at 20 meters distance) in the 5 
months old crop. 
• Male moths can be trapped and killed. 
Top borer:
• Release of parasite, Isotima javensis Rohn against 3rd or 4th 
broods of the pest. 
White grubs:
• Handpicking and destruction. 
Red rot:
• Selection of resistant varieties and disease free bud chips.
• Destruction of affected clumps. 
Wilt:
• Healthy buds, crop rotation and optimization of soil moisture. 
14. Intercropping
In sugarcane, intercrops like cowpea, chickpea, potato, green gram, 
water melon, wheat and many other crops can be tried, as there is 
a wide spacing between rows. Depending on the location speciﬁ c 
factors, different intercrops may be tried.
• Intercrops control weeds up to 60% in the initial stage and 
provide extra income to farmers.
• They act as a live mulch and preserve moisture and reduce the 
pest attack by being alternate hosts in some cases. Green manures 
raised as intercrop improve the soil fertility on incorporation. 
15. Harvesting
Harvesting in sugarcane is practiced in collaboration with the 
industry, in most of the cases, to suit the factory timings. Sucrose 
content in the plants will reach the desirable level on the 10th 
month of the one year crop duration, and they will be ready for 
harvest within the next two months. 
Mulching, good 
water management 
and earthing up are 
good practices for
controlling Early 
shoot borer.
Bio-control measures 
and Pheromone traps 
help in control of 
specific pests and 
preservation of other
friendly insects.
Selection of 
resistant varieties
and disease free
bud chips are 
important to avoid 
diseases in later
stages.
Sucrose content in 
the plants will reach 
the desirable level 
on the 10th month 
of one year old crop
Intercropping helps 
in optimum utilization 
of land.
Pheromone Trap
Intercropping with bean

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 25
Pit System of Planting
I
n this method, the seedlings are planted in circular pits dug out 
with speciﬁ c diameters and distances. The circular pits of 3 ft 
or 5 ft diameter are dug out to a depth of 1.5 to 2 ft. Row to row 
spacing is maintained at 7 ft and pit to pit spacing is maintained 
at 6 ft. 
• At these spacing’s, about 1050 to 1150 (with 3 ft diameter) or 
500 to 550 (with 5 ft diameter) pits can be made per acre. The 
pits are then ﬁ lled with loose dug out soil, FYM or press mud 
leaving about 1 ft space at the top. 
• Two to four seedlings per pit with 3 ft diameter and 6 to 8 
seedlings per pit with 5 ft diameter can be planted close to the 
edge and covered with soil to a thickness of 5 cm. About 2000 
to 4000 seedlings are sufﬁ cient per acre, saving the seed cost 
further for a farmer.
• All other crop management practices can be followed as 
practiced in normal method. 
Beneﬁ ts:
• This method has given high yields in the subtropics and in 
the tropical part of India, about 25-50 % higher yields were 
obtained.
• Growth of the crop will be vigorous and the maturity will also 
be earlier compared to the normal method 
Lower layer of the 
soil gets good light 
and air.
Insects are exposed 
and eaten by birds.
Pit with sprouted seedlings
Circular pits

26 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
All nutrients are 
placed in the root, 
thus better utilized.
Sufficient space 
between pits will 
make operations like 
spraying, dusting and 
propping easy.
Due to strong root 
growth, lodging is 
checked.
• Sufﬁ cient and equal spacing between the clumps and rows allows 
sufﬁ cient light and air circulation improving the growth.
• In case of drip irrigation, nutrition supplied through drip 
fertigation will help in faster crop growth
• This method allows a farmer to pay individual attention to the 
crops or crop pits.
• It gives better ratoon crops and has also been found useful 
under saline soils and saline water irrigated conditions. 
• All the shoots will be of the same age, so there is uniformity in 
growth and sugar accumulation in the canes.
• The most important factor is that the seedlings are placed at a 
depth, which will be always moist, hence, in case of drought, or 
non-availability of water, the yields will not get affected.
Rows of pits with drip irrigation

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 27
R
atooning is a method where the lower parts of the plants along 
with the roots are left uncut at the time of harvesting. It is 
the most commonly followed and important practice in sugarcane 
cultivation. In ratoon crops, there is a saving in cost of cultivation 
in terms of land preparation, seed canes, etc. If ratoons are well 
maintained, they give high yields. But, for a better ratoon crop, a 
better plant crop is necessary. 
Within a week after harvesting the plant crop, ratoon management 
practices like stubble shaving, off baring, gap ﬁ lling etc., should be 
initiated. 
Stubble shaving
• The stubbles just above ground level should be cut using a very 
sharp blade.
• This helps the healthy underground buds to sprout and establish 
a deeper root system.
• The deeper root system thus obtained facilitates optimum 
utilization of the nutrients and moisture available in the lower soil 
layers and provides good support for growth of the ratoon crop.
Off baring
• It is an operation wherein the ridges are broken or cut on either 
side using a plough.
• This will loosen the soil to develop better root system and 
thereby better absorption of nutrients and water.
Ratoon Management in Sugarcane
Avoid ratooning of 
pest and disease 
infected plant crops.
Plant crops should 
be harvested 
when the weather 
conditions are 
conducive for stubble 
sprouting.
Harvest of the plant 
crops should be 
done close to the 
ground level.
Ratoon management

28 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
Gap ﬁ lling
• If there are no cane clumps for a distance of more than 60 cms or so, it can be considered as 
a gap.
• Clumps with excess sprouting can be uprooted, cut into quarters and planted in the gaps.
• Gap ﬁ lling can be done using the seedlings raised in the nursery. 
Row thinning
In areas where close spaced plantings are followed, entire canes of alternate rows can be 
removed. This can be done by running a plough along the sides of the alternate ridges selected 
for removal of the cane rows. This will break or loosen the ridges and facilitate easy lifting and 
removal of the plants. While removing the canes, gap ﬁ lling in the adjacent rows can be done. 
This practice of removing alternate rows of canes will increase the space between the rows and 
thus facilitate sprouting of more tillers because of optimum utilization of the available nutrients 
and sunlight. 
Fertilizer application
• Entire dose of phosphorous, one-third each of nitrogen and potassium as recommended for 
plant crops can also be applied to ratoon crops. The suggested dose should be applied soon 
after stubble shaving and off barring, and covered with soil.
• The remaining dose of nitrogen and potassium can be top dressed in equal splits around 30th 
and 60th days. 
Besides the above mentioned practices, all the other crop management practices like irrigation, 
weeding and earthing up should be continued and followed as done for plant crops. Ratoon 
crops mature one month prior to the plant crops. In the conventional method of sugarcane 
cultivation, ratoon crops are maintained for only a maximum of two seasons but farmers 
practicing SSI methods maybe able to achieve 5 to 6 ratoon crops. 
 Healthy ratoon crops

Improving Sugarcane Cultivation in India 29
Summary
S
ugarcane is one of the most important industry based crops in the world. India is the second 
largest sugarcane producer and the highest sugar consumer in the world. Apart from sugar, 
sugarcane is grown for many other uses like fodder, paper and bio-fuel. In spite of its growing 
demand, there are a number of problems which affect the sugarcane farmers in sustaining 
their production and increasing their proﬁ t. On the ecological front also sugarcane cultivation 
is becoming a difﬁ cult task, due to its water-guzzling nature and depleting water table. So, 
it’s high time we amend our usual, high inputs intensive method of sugarcane cultivation and 
lookout for some innovative, resource concerned method of producing sugarcanes. Sustainable 
Sugarcane Initiative (SSI) is one such method of sugarcane cultivation which uses less inputs 
in a sustainable manner. 
SSI involves use of less seeds, less water and optimum land utilization to achieve more yields. 
It is governed by some principles like using single budded chips, raising nursery, wider spacing, 
sufﬁ cient irrigation and intercropping. By practicing these measures, the following beneﬁ ts can 
be realized: 
• Better germination percentage
• High number of millable canes
• Reduction in the duration of crop to some extent
• Increased water use efﬁ ciency
• Improvement in accessibility to nutrients with optimum use of fertilizers
• More accessibility to air and sunlight
• Reduction in cost of cultivation and
• Extra income from intercrops 
On the whole, by practicing SSI farmers can very well increase their productivity by reducing the 
use of inputs like fertilizers and saving the vital resources like water simultaneously. Hence, it is 
very much possible for sugarcane farmers to reap greater economical beneﬁ ts by maintaining 
ecological sustainability. 
By practicing SSI 
farmers can very 
well increase their 
productivity by
reducing the inputs 
and saving the water.

30 Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
Annexure
Size of Shade net shed required for nursery (1 acre)
Size of a tray (50 cones)
0.28 m
Total number of trays needed for nursery (1 acre): 100
Size of Shade net shed: Length: 7.5m, Width: 5 m, Height: 3 m, which can accommodate 
120 trays.
The size of the Shade net shed can be extended as per the requirement.
1.68 m
5 m
1.68 m
Walking path
Entrance with gate
Walking path
Walking path
7.5 m
Raising nursery through SSI method requires materials like plastic trays, coco- pith, 
shade nets, rose cans etc. The materials can be obtained from manufacturers or 
Horticulture and Forest nursery equipment suppliers locally. For information on 
materials contact ICRISAT-WWF Project ofﬁ ce.
2.8 m
2.8 m

Trainings and ﬁ eld interventions on SSI methods by ICRISAT-WWF
SSI ﬁ eld training for staff from Triveni Sugars, Uttar Pradesh at Vikarabad in Andhra Pradesh
Transplanting of seedlings in the main ﬁ eld at Chandanpur in Uttar Pradesh
SSI training for farmers from Orissa at ICRISAT, Patancheru in Andhra Pradesh
Farmers being trained on bud chipping at Khatauli in Uttar Pradesh

Farmers from Punjab counting the tillers of mother 
shoot cut plant at a farmer’s ﬁ eld in Andhra Pradesh
Field training for farmers on SSI methods at Nayagarh in Orissa
Farm labour gaining practical experience in transplantation of seedlings at Hathanur in Andhra Pradesh 
Farmers and NGO staff from Karnataka interacting with SSI farmer at Basanthpur in Andhra Pradesh

ii Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative
The International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) and World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) have 
partnered together to explore options for ‘Improving the water productivity in agriculture’. Currently working on rice with 
the System of Rice Intensiﬁ cation (SRI) and Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative (SSI) in sugarcane, the project is speciﬁ cally 
looking at farm-based approaches based on principles of ‘more with less’ in agriculture. The highly successful methods and 
practices increase the proﬁ tability of the farmers signiﬁ cantly while reducing the inputs — water, fertilizer, seed material — 
and improving the productivity of water, land and labour.
This project is directly relevant to the broader goals of both the WWF and ICRISAT with respect to improving the lives and 
livelihoods of millions of farmers and reducing the ecological footprint on planet earth without compromising on the 
food security.
ICRISAT-WWF Project
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT)
Patancheru 502 324 
Andhra Pradesh 
India