Foreword 
 
Numerous books and documents have been written and published about the 
sugarcane crop, documenting cultivation practices associated with its culture. A vast 
majority of these describing agronomic practices are adequate in written text, but are 
inadequate in directing the reader about field practical skills in growing sugarcane. 
 
To be viable and competitive, sugarcane growers face many challenges. These require 
significant economic and social restructuring and the adoption of new, complex and 
high-risk technologies. The main prerequisites for these decisions are the availability of 
high quality, timely and relevant information. 
 
More than ever, sugarcane farmers, cane department officials of sugar factories, 
technicians, extension workers, students, consultants, bank officials, teachers and 
research scientists need to understand the whys and how's of modern sugarcane 
production with drip irrigation. 
 
But recommendations given to farmers often do not answer questions such as growing 
method, drip system guidelines, how to increase the efficiency of water use and 
applied fertilizer through fertigation, how to lessen the chance of lodging etc. This is 
why there is a wide gap between the potential and actual productivities in most 
sugarcane growing regions of the world. 
 
Producing this information was a challenge for Netafim ACS, Israel. The existing 
information system on drip irrigated sugarcane crop lacks adaptability to local 
conditions, completeness, quality, easy access and regular updating. Over the last 45 
years Netafim has developed many crop growing manuals to address these 
deficiencies. This has culminated in this new series of growing guide on web pages.

Introduction 
 
Sugarcane, Saccharum officinarum L., an old energy source for human beings and, 
more recently, a replacement of fossil fuel for motor vehicles, was first grown in South 
East Asia and Western India. Around 327 B.C. it was an important crop in the Indian 
sub-continent. It was introduced to Egypt around 647 A.D. and, about one century 
later, to Spain (755 A.D.). 
 
 
Global Distribution of Sugarcane (Click to Enlarge) 
 
Since then, the cultivation of sugarcane was extended to nearly all tropical and sub-
tropical regions. Portuguese and Spaniards took it to the New World early in the XVI 
century. It was introduced to the United States of America (Louisiana) around 1741. 
 
Botanically, sugarcane belongs to the Andropogonae tribe of the family Gramineae, 
order Glumiflorae, class Monocotyledoneae, subdivision Angiospermae, division 
Embryophita siphonogama. The subtribe is Sacharae and the genus, of course, 
Saccharum, derived from the Sanskrit "sarkara = white sugar", a reminder that the 
plant reached the Mediterranean region from India. 
 
Sugarcane growing countries of the world are lying between the latitude 36.7° north 
and 31.0° south of the equator extending from tropical to subtropical zones. This 
map depicts the distribution of sugarcane in the world. 
 
Worldwide sugarcane occupies an area of 20.42 million ha with a total production of 
1333 million metric tons (FAO, 2003). Sugarcane area and productivity differ widely

from country to country (Table 1). Brazil has the highest area (5.343 million ha), while 
Australia has the highest productivity (85.1 tons/ha). Out of 121 sugarcane producing 
countries, fifteen countries (Brazil, India, China, Thailand, Pakistan, Mexico, Cuba, 
Columbia, Australia, USA, Philippines, South Africa, Argentina, Myanmar, Bangladesh) 
86% of area and 87.1% of production (Table 1). Out of the total white crystal sugar 
production, approximately 70% comes from sugarcane and 30% from sugar beet. 
 
Sugarcane area and productivity differ widely from country to country (Table 1). Brazil 
has the highest area (5.343 million ha), while Australia has the highest productivity 
(85.1 tons/ha). Out of 90 sugarcane producing countries, fifteen countries (Brazil, 
India, China, Thailand, Pakistan, Mexico, Cuba, Columbia, Australia, USA, Philippines, 
South Africa, Argentina, Myanmar, Bangladesh) 86% of area and 87.1% of production 
(Table 1). 
 
Table 1. Sugarcane In The world: Area, Production And Productivity 
Country 
Area 
(million ha) 
Production (million tons) 
Productivity 
(Tons/ha) 
Brazil 
5.343 
386.2 
72.3 
India 
4.608 
289.6 
62.8 
China 
1.328 
92.3 
65.5 
Thailand 
0.970 
64.4 
66.4 
Pakistan 
1.086 
52.0 
47.9 
Mexico 
0.639 
45.1 
70.6 
Colombia 
0.435 
36.6 
84.1 
Australia 
0.423 
36.0 
85.1 
USA 
0.404 
31.3 
77.5 
Philippines 
0.385 
25.8 
67.1 
Indonesia 
0.350 
25.6 
73.1 
Cuba 
0.654 
22.9 
35.0 
South Africa 
0.325 
20.6 
63.4 
Argentina 
0.295 
19.2 
65.2 
Myanmar 
0.165 
7.5 
45.4 
Bangladesh 
0.166 
6.8 
41.2 
WORLD 
20.42 
1333.2 
65.2 
 
 Sugarcane is a renewable, natural agricultural resource because it provides sugar, 
besides biofuel, fibre, fertilizer and myriad of by products/co-products with ecological 
sustainability. 
 
Sugarcane juice is used for making white sugar, brown sugar (Khandsari), Jaggery 
(Gur) and ethanol. The main byproducts of sugar industry are bagasse and molasses.

Molasses, the chief by-product, is the main raw material for alcohol and thus for 
alcohol-based industries. Excess bagasse is now being used as raw material in the 
paper industry. Besides, co-generation of power using bagasse as fuel is considered 
feasible in most sugar mills.

Growth morphology 
 
Propagation 
 
Stem cuttings or sections of the stalks 
called "setts" or seed pieces propagate 
sugarcane. Each sett contains one or 
more buds. The buds, located in the root 
band of the node, are embryonic shoots 
consisting of a miniature stalk with small 
leaves. 
 
The outer small leaves are in the form of 
scales. The outermost bud scale has the 
form of a hood. Normally, one bud is 
present on each node and they alternate 
between one side of the stalk to the 
other. 
 
Variations in size, shape and ther characteristics of the bud provide a means of 
distinguishing between varieties. Each sett also contains a circle of small dots above 
the node, which are the root primordia. Each primordium exhibits a dark center, which 
is a root cap, and a light colored "halo". 
 
The bud sprouts under favourable conditions and gives rise to a primary stalk, whereas 
from the primordial the sett roots originate. 
 
During nearly one month after germination, that is, sprouting of the buds, the young 
plant lives at the expense of the reserves present in the seed piece, and partially using 
water and nutrients provided for by the first roots. 
 
The Leaf 
The leaf of the sugarcane plant is divided into two 
parts: sheath and blade, separated by a blade joint. 
The sheath, as its name implies, completely sheaths 
the stalk, extending over at least one complete 
internode. 
 
The leaves are usually attached alternately to the 
nodes, thus forming two ranks on opposite sides. The 
mature sugarcane plant has an average total upper 
leaf surface of about 0.5 square meter and the 
number of green leaves per stalk is around ten, 
depending on variety and growing conditions.

The blade joint is where two wedge shaped areas called "dewlaps" are found. The 
leaves are numbered by Kuijper's system, as quoted by Casagrande (1991). The first 
leaf from top to bottom of the stalk with clearly visible dewlap is designated as +1. 
Downwards they receive, in succession, the numbers +2, and +3. The "top visible 
dewlap" leaf (+3) is a diagnostic tissue that is frequently used in the evaluation of the 
nutritional status. 
 
The Inflorescence 
 
When a sugarcane plant has reached a 
relatively mature stage of development, 
its growing point may, under certain 
photoperiod 
and 
soil 
moisture 
conditions, change from the vegetative 
to reproductive stage. 
 
This means the growing point ceases 
forming leaf primordia and starts the 
production of an inflorescence. It is a 
short day plant. Its photoperiodic 
conditions can thus be attained largely 
in the tropics. 
 
The 
inflorescence, 
or 
tassel, 
of 
sugarcane is an open-branched panicle 
.It is also known as arrow. Therefore 
flowering is also known as "arrowing". 
Each 
tassel 
consists 
of 
several 
thousand tiny flowers, each capable of 
producing one seed. The seeds are 
extremely 
small 
and 
weigh 
approximately 250 per gram or 113,500 
per pound. 
 
For commercial sugarcane production,inflorescence 
development is of little economic importance. Flowering is important for crossing and 
producing hybrid varieties. 
 
Generally, a day length close to 12.5 hours and night temperatures between 20° to 
25°c will induce floral initiation. Optimum growth conditions in the vegetative phase 
(fertile soil, abundant supply of nitrogen and moisture) restrict inflorescence while 
stress conditions induce formation of blossoms.

The Root System 
 
In the commercial sugarcane crop, 
which is asexually propagated, 
development of the root system is 
initiated soon after planting a 
portion of stem (sett) with atleast 
one lateral bud. 
 
The first roots formed are sett 
roots, which emerge from a band of 
root primordia above the leaf scar 
on the nodes of the sett.Sett roots 
can emerge within 24 hours of 
planting, although differences in 
the 
time 
required 
for 
root 
emergence occur among varieties. 
Sett roots are fine and highly branched roots, which sustain the growing plant in the 
first weeks after germination. 
 
Shoot roots are second type of root, which emerge from the base of the new shoot 5-7 
days after planting .The shoot roots are thicker and fleshier than sett roots and develop 
in to the main root system of the plant. Sett roots continue to grow for a period of 6-15 
days after planting, mostly senescing and disappearing by 60-90 days as the shoot 
root system develops and takes over supply of water and nutrients to the growing 
shoot. By the age of 3 months, sett roots comprise less than 2% of root dry mass. 
 
Sett roots initially have an elongation rate of a few mm/day, reaching 20 mm/day within 
a few days of germination under favourable conditions. Shoot roots grow more rapidly, 
with maximum rates of elongation of up to 80 mm/day observed, though only for short 
periods. Mean growth rates for shoot roots over 10 days were 40 mm/day in sandy 
soils and 28 mm/day in heavy clay. 
 
Mean rates of root penetration, or the rate of descent of the root system, of 20-30 
mm/day were also reported. Root penetration in another trial was 20 mm/day down to 
a depth of 1.6 m for rainfed crops, but slowed in irrigated crops to 17 mm/day in the 
first 1.0 m and 6 mm/day between 1.0 and 1.6 m. 
 
Genotypic variation in sugarcane root systems is well documented and those 
producing many tillers normally produce many roots because each new tiller is a 
source of shoot roots. Likewise cultivars with more horizontal (weak gravitropic) root 
penetration are more resistant to lodging than those with strongly gravitropic root 
system.

A longitudinal section of a root tip consists mainly of four parts: the root cap, the 
growing point, the region of elongation, and the region of root hairs. The root cap 
protects the tender tissues of the growing point as the root pushes through the soil. 
The growing point consists mainly of an apical meristem, where cell division takes 
place. 
 
In the region of elongation, the cells increase in size and diameter until they reach their 
ultimate size. The region of root hairs is characterized by epidermal cells forming 
outgrowths (hairs), which dramatically increases the root-absorbing surface. 
 
Stalk 
 
Stalk is also known as "millable cane". It develops from the bud of seed-cane. When 
seed-cane is planted, each bud may form a primary shoot. 
 
From this shoot, secondary shoots 
called "tillers" may form from the 
underground buds on the primary 
shoot. In turn, additional tillers may 
form 
from 
the 
underground 
secondary shoot buds. The stalk 
consists of segments called joints. 
 
Each joint is made up of a node and 
an internode. The node is where the 
leaf attaches to the stalk and where 
the buds and root primordia are 
found. A leaf scar can be found at 
the node when the leaf drops off the 
plant. The length and diameter of 
the joints vary widely with different varieties and growing conditions. The colors of the 
stalk seen at the internodes depend on the cane variety and environmental conditions. 
 
For example, exposure of the internodes to the sun may result in a complete change of 
color. The same variety grown in different climates may exhibit different colors. All 
colors of the stalk derive from two basic pigments: the red color of anthocynin and the 
green of chlorophyll. 
 
The ratio of the concentration of these two pigments produce colors from green to 
purple-red to red to almost black. Yellow stalks indicate a relative lack of these 
pigments. The surface of the internode, with the exception of the growth ring, is more 
or less covered by wax. The amount of wax is variety dependent.

The top of the stalk is relatively low in sucrose and therefore is of little value to the mill. 
The top 1/3 contains, however, many buds and a good supply of nutrients, which 
makes it valuable as seed cane for planting. 
 
A cross section of an internode shows, from the outside to the center, the following 
tissues: epidermis, cortex or rind, and ground tissue with embedded vascular bundles. 
The cells of the rind are thick-walled and lignified. These cells help strengthen the 
stalk. More toward the center, the ground tissue contains the vascular bundles with the 
xylem and phloem. 
 
Xylem tissue conducts water and its dissolved minerals upward from the roots, and 
phloem conductive tissue transports plant- manufactured nutrients and products, for 
the most part, downward toward the roots. 
 
Two types of cracks are sometimes found on the surface of the stalk; harmless, small 
corky cracks, which are restricted to the epidermis, and growth cracks which may be 
deep and run the whole length of the internode. 
 
Growth cracks are harmful since they allow increased water loss and expose the stalk 
to disease organisms and insects. Growth cracks are dependent on variety and 
growing conditions.

Crop growth phases 
 
Germination and Establishment Phase 
The germination phase is from 
planting 
to 
the 
completion 
of 
germination of buds. 
Under field conditions germination 
starts from 7 to 10 days and 
usually lasts for about 30-35 days. 
In sugarcane, germination denotes 
activation 
and 
subsequent 
sprouting of the vegetative bud. 
The 
germination 
of 
bud 
is 
influenced by the external as well 
as internal factors. 
The external factors are the soil 
moisture, soil temperature and 
aeration. 
The internal factors are the bud 
health, sett moisture, sett reducing 
sugar content and sett nutrient 
status. 
Optimum temperature for sprouting 
is 
around 
28o-30oc 
.Base 
temperature 
for germination 
is 
about 12o. Warm, moist soil ensures rapid germination. 
Germination results in an increased respiration and hence good soil aeration 
are important. 
Therefore open structured porous soils facilitate better germination. 
Under field conditions, about 60 per cent germination can be considered safe 
for raising a satisfactory crop. 
 
Tillering Phase 
Tillering starts from around 40 days after planting and may last up to 120 days. 
Tillering is a physiological process of repeated under ground branching from 
compact nodal joints of the primary shoot. 
Tillering provides the crop with appropriate number of stalks required for a good 
yield. 
Various factors viz., variety, light, temperature, irrigation (soil moisture) and 
fertilizer practices influence tillering

Light is the most important external factor influencing tillering. Adequate light 
reaching the base of the sugarcane plant during the tillering period is of 
paramount importance. 
Temperature around 30oc is considered optimum for tillering. Temperature 
below 20o retards tillering. 
Early formed tillers give rise to 
thicker and heavier stalks. Late 
formed tillers either die or 
remain short or immature. 
Maximum 
tiller 
population 
reaches around 90-120 days 
after planting. By about 150-
180 days, atleast 50 per cent 
of the shoots die and a stable 
population is established. 
Cultivation practices such as 
spacing, time of fertigation, 
water availability and weed 
control influence tillering. 
Though 6-8 tillers are produced from a bud, ultimately only 1.5 to 2 tillers per 
bud remains to form canes. 
Ratoon crop gives much higher and early tillering than a plant crop. 
Encouraging good tillering is important to build adequate population. 
Grand Growth Phase 
Grand growth phase starts from 120 days after planting and lasts up to 270 
days in a 12-month crop. During the early period of this phase tiller stabilization 
takes place. Out of the total tillers 
produced only 40-50% survive by 150 
days to form millable cane. 
Most important phase of the crop wherein 
the actual cane formation and elongation 
and thus yield build up takes place. 
Leaf production is frequent and rapid 
during this phase with LAI reaching around 
6-7. 
Under favourable conditions stalks grow 
rapidly almost 4-5 internodes per month. 
Drip irrigation, fertigation and warm, humid 
and sunny climatic conditions favour better 
cane elongation. Moisture stress reduces 
internodal length. A temperature around 30oc with a humidity of around 80% is 
most conducive for good growth.

Ripening and Maturation Phase 
Ripening 
and 
maturation phase in a 
twelve-month 
crop 
lasts for about three 
months starting from 
270-360 days. 
Sugar synthesis and 
rapid accumulation of 
sugar 
takes 
place 
during this phase and 
vegetative growth is 
reduced. 
As ripening advances, 
simple 
sugars 
(monosaccharide viz., fructose and glucose) are converted into cane sugar 
(sucrose, a disaccharide). 
Cane ripening proceeds from bottom to the top and hence bottom portion 
contains more sugars than the top portions. 
Ample sunshine, clear skies cool nights and warm days (i.e., more diurnal 
variation in temperature) and dry weather are highly conducive for ripening. 
Practical Implications 
Better understanding of what is going on in the plant 
This understanding aids in efficient water and nutrient management 
Control of vegetative growth and manipulation of sugar production to some 
extent is possible 
Knowledge of phenological growth phases is essential for maximizing cane 
yields and sugar recovery 
Climate 
 
Sugarcane is grown in the world from alatitude 36.7° N and 31.0° S, from sea level to 
1000m of altitude or little more. It is considered as essentially a tropical plant. It is a 
long duration crop and thus it encounters all the seasons' viz., rainy, winter and 
summer during its life cycle. 
 
Principal climatic components that control cane growth, yield and quality are 
temperature, light and moisture availability. The plant thrives best in tropical hot sunny 
areas. The "ideal" climate for production of maximum sugar from sugarcane is 
characterized as:

• 
A long, warm growing season with a high incidence of solar radiation and 
adequate moisture (rainfall) - the plant uses from 148 to 300g of water to 
produce 1.0g of dry substance. 
• 
A fairly dry, sunny and cool, but frost free season for ripening and harvesting - 
moisture percentage drops steadily throughout the life of the sugarcane plant, 
from 83% in very young cane to 71% in mature cane, meanwhile sucrose grows 
from less than 10 to more than 45% of the dry weight. 
• 
Freedom from typhoons and hurricanes 
Rainfall: A total rainfall between 1100 and 1500 mm is adequate provided the 
distribution is right, abundant in the months of vegetative growth followed by a dry 
period for ripening. During the active growth period rainfall encourages rapid cane 
growth, cane elongation and internode formation. But during ripening period high 
rainfall is not desirable because it leads to poor juice quality, encourages vegetative 
growth, formation of water shoots and increase in the tissue moisture. It also 
hampers harvesting and transport operations. This seems to be the case in regions 
of South America, South East Asia and some parts of Southern India. 
Temperature: Growth is closely related to temperature. Optimum temperature for 
sprouting (germination) of stem cuttings is 32° to 38°c. It slows down below 25°, 
reaches plateau between 30°-34°, is reduced above 35° and practically stops when 
the temperature is above 38°.Temperatures above 38° reduce the rate of 
photosynthesis and increase respiration. For ripening, however, relatively low 
temperatures in the range of 12° to 14° are desirable, since this has a noticeable 
influence on the reduction of vegetative growth rate and enrichment of sucrose in 
the cane. At higher temperatures reversion of sucrose into fructose and glucose 
may occur besides enhancement of photorespiration thus leading to less 
accumulation of sugars. Severe cold weather inhibits bud sprouting in ratoon crop 
and arrests cane growth. Temperatures lower than 0°C induces freezing of less 
protected parts such as young leaves and lateral buds. The damage depends upon 
the length of the cold period. Smut initiation and spread is high at ambient 
temperatures of 25° -30°. Similarly the spread of red not disease is high at higher 
temperatures (37°-400°) when all other conditions are similar. Rust incidence is 
high when the minimum temperatures are drastically reduced. Shoot-fly incidence 
is high in summer when the air temperatures are very high. Also higher shoot fly 
incidence was observed when the difference between maximum (day) and 
minimum (night) temperature are low. 
Relative humidity: High humidity (80-85%) favours rapid cane elongation during 
grand growth period. A moderate value of 45-65% coupled with limited water supply 
is favourable during the ripening phase.

Sunlight: 
 
 
 
Sugarcane is a sun loving plant. It grows well in areas receiving solar energy from 
18 - 36 MJ/m2. Being a C4 plant, sugarcane is capable of high photosynthetic rates 
and the process shows a high saturation range with regards to light. Tillering is 
affected by intensity and duration of sunshine. High light intensity and long duration 
promote tillering while cloudy and short days affect it adversely. Stalk growth 
increases when daylight is within the range of 10 - 14 hours. Increase in leaf area 
index is rapid during 3rd to 5th month, coinciding the formative phase of the crop 
and attained its peak values during early grand growth phase (Ramanujam and 
Venkataramana, 1999). 
Optimum climatic requirements: Mean total radiation received in 12 months of 
growth has been estimated to be 
around 6350 MJ/m2. About 60% 
of this radiation was intercepted 
by the canopy during formative 
and grand growth periods. The 
total 
dry 
matter 
production 
showed linear relationship with 
the intercepted PAR and the test 
of correlation yielded R2 value of 
0.913 
(Ramanujam 
and 
Venkataramana, 1999). However, 
the energy conversion rate in 
terms of dry matter production 
per unit of intercepted radiation 
showed a quadratic response 
with percent light interception indicating that the rate of energy conversion 
increased linearly up to 50% light interception and beyond this level, the rate of 
photosynthetic conversion of solar radiation gets reduced (Ramanujam and 
Venkataramana, 1999). In sugarcane crop canopy the upper 6 leaves intercept

70% of the radiation and the photosynthetic rate of the lower leaves decreased due 
to mutual shading. Therefore, for effective utilization of radiant energy a LAI of 3.0 - 
3.5 is considered optimum. Areas having short growing period benefit from closer 
spacing to intercept high amount of solar radiation and produce higher yields. But in 
areas with long growing season wider spacing is better to avoid mutual shading 
and mortality of shoots. Rough estimates show that 80% of water loss is associated 
with solar energy, 14% with wind and 6% with temperature and humidity. High wind 
velocities exceeding 60-km/hour are harmful to grownup canes, since they cause 
lodging and cane breakage. Also, winds enhance moisture loss from the plants and 
thus aggravate the ill effects of moisture stress. 
Effect of climate on sugarcane yields and sugar recovery: 
The sugarcane productivity and juice quality are profoundly influenced by weather 
conditions prevailing during the various crop-growth sub-periods. 
Sugar recovery is highest when the weather is dry with low humidity; bright 
sunshine hours, cooler nights with wide diurnal variations and very little rainfall 
during ripening period. These conditions favour high sugar accumulation. 
 
Soil Requirement 
 
Soil is a medium for plant growth. It provides nutrients, water and anchorage to the 
growing plants. Maintenance of proper physical, chemical and biological conditions of 
the soil is necessary for realizing higher growth, yield and quality of sugarcane. 
Sugarcane does not require any specific type of soil as it can be successfully raised on 
diverse soil types ranging from sandy soils to clay loams & heavy clays. 
 
A well drained, deep, loamy soil with a bulk density of 1.1 to 1.2 g/cm3 (1.3-1.4 g/cm3 in 
sandy soils) and total porosity, with an adequate balance between pores of various 
sizes, is higher than 50%; ground water table below 1.5 to 2.0 m from soil surface and 
an available water holding capacity of 15% or more (15 cm per meter depth of soil is 
considered ideal for sugarcane cultivation). 
 
The optimum soil pH is about 6.5 but sugarcane can tolerate considerable degree of 
soil acidity and alkalinity. Hence, it is found growing in soils with pH in the range of 5 to 
8.5. Liming is required if pH is less than 5.0, or gypsum application if pH is more 
than 9.5. Nematode infestations are likely to occur in very sandy soils. 
 
Soil testing before planting is desirable as it helps in determining the optimum quantity 
of macro and micro nutrient application. Chemical constraints in the soils, such as 
acidity and low fertility, are relatively easy to correct or control.

Poor physical conditions like soil compaction due to intense mechanization when 
limiting, are much more difficult to ameliorate. For this reason, physical properties of 
soil are given as a factor in sugarcane growth. Based on the experience gained in 
Brazil, a few criteria to define soils, which are apt for sugarcane growing, were 
suggested (Table 2). 
 
Table 2. Criteria to Classify the Aptitude of Soils for Growing Sugarcane 
 
Class 
Characteristics Good 
Average 
Restricted 
Unfit 
Effective depth 
Deep 
Medium 
Shallow 
Too shallow 
Soil texture 
Clayey 
Medium to clayey 
Sandy 
Too sandy 
Relief 
Flat 
Rolling 
Too rolling 
Hilly 
Fertility 
High 
Medium or low 
Too low 
Too low 
Drainage 
Good 
Medium to 
accentuated 
or incomplete 
Incomplete
Excessive or 
deficient 
Restraints to 
mechanization 
Absent 
Medium 
Strong 
Too strong 
Susceptibility 
to erosion 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Too high 
Source: Kofeler and Bonzelli (1987) 
 
 
Management of compacted soils 
Problem of sub-surface hard pans or compaction is a common phenomenon in 
intensive mechanization, more number of ratoons and sugarcane - rice rotation 
systems. 
 
Effects of Soil Compaction 
Increases bulk density (Light to medium soils: 1.5 to 1.7 g/m3 and Heavy soils: 
1.45 to 1.57 g/m3) and soil penetration resistance 
Reduction in porosity, infiltration rates, and water storage capacity 
Impedance to root penetration and proliferation. Shallow root system makes the 
plant susceptible to drought during dry spells. 
Reduced nutrient and water uptake 
Promotes lodging particularly in unusually wet conditions 
 Ameliorative Practices 
Deep ploughing, sub-soiling or chiseling up to a depth of 50 - 75 cm at 90 cm 
Application of organic manures (FYM at 25 tons/ha), growing of green manure 
crops and turning them into soil 
Incorporation of gypsum at 5 tons/ha

Management of Acid Soils 
Usually acid soils are found in high rainfall areas and in soils where organic matter 
content is high. Soil acidity adversely affects sugarcane growth, yield and quality. 
Under acidic conditions, the adverse effects are due to aluminium, iron and 
manganese toxicity. Aluminium toxicity can cause P deficiency symptoms due to 
precipitation of alumino-phosphate complexes with in the plant and in the soil. In 
Australia, Ca deficiency is associated with Al toxicity on acid soils. 
 
In acid soils conditions (pH less than 5.2), Al replaces Ca on cation exchange capacity. 
Aluminium toxicity may occur on mineral soils when Al occupies greater than 30% of 
the cation exchange capacity. 
 
In 
sandy 
soils 
having a very low 
cation 
exchange 
capacity, 
lower 
concentrations of Al 
in the soil solution 
may cause toxicity 
problems. 
High 
applications of K 
may 
induce 
Ca 
deficiency in acid 
soil containing low 
Ca levels (Photo 
Source: 
Anderson 
and Bowen, 1990). 
 
Root growth, tillering, shoot elongation and LAI are severely affected due to the above 
nutritional disorders thus causing poor cane yield and juice quality. 
 
On acid soils in Brazil, better root development deeper in the soil horizon has been 
noticed when gypsum is used. Liming is the most important practice in the acid soils to 
improve productions. 
 
The General Lime Requirements as Follows. 
Sandy soils 450 - 675 kg/ha every 2 years 
Clay loams 1800 - 2250 kg/ha every 3 - 4 years 
Clay soils 2700 - 3600 kg/ha every 4 - 5 years. 
Bone meal and rock phosphates are well suited to acid soils to supply 
phosphorous

Management of Soil Salinity and Sodicity 
The saline and sodic soils are wide spread in sugarcane growing areas of the world. A 
soil with electrical conductivity below 2 dS/m, by and large, does not affect the growth 
appreciably. Sugarcane is moderately sensitive to soil salinity. The decrease in crop 
yield varies with the level of soil salinity (Photo Source: Anderson and Bowen, 1990). 
 
The decrease in crop 
yield is 0% at an ECe of 
1.7 dS/m, 10% at 3.3, 
25% at 6.0, 50% at 10.4 
and 100% at an ECe of 
18.6 dS/m. Soil salinity 
also 
adversely 
affects 
sheath moisture content 
and nitrogen content. 
 
Likewise, 
SAR 
more 
than 20 
caused 
50% 
yield reduction. Increase 
in exchangeable sodium 
percent from 14.4 to 23.5 lead to reduction in cane (9 - 26%) and sugar yield (12 - 
29%) in 10 sugarcane cultivars studied at Karnal, India. 
 
Varieties differ in their responses to soil salinity and acidity. Germination and early 
growth stages are more sensitive than later stages of crop growth. Ratoon crop is 
more sensitive to salinity than plant crop. 
 
Symptoms of Soil Salinity and Sodicity 
Stunted growth and necrotic leaves with scorched tips and margins 
Poor tillering and root growth 
Reduction in internodal length and girth of cane 
Impaired cane quality with reduced juice purities 
Problems in processing for jaggery and sugar 
 Ameliorative Measures 
Growing of slat tolerant varieties 
Manipulation of soil environment by reclamation and drainage 
Adoption of drip irrigation to maintain higher soil water potential in the root zone 
by light and frequent irrigations

Drip Irrigation Features 
 
Introduction 
Drip 
irrigation 
in 
sugarcane 
is 
a 
relatively 
new 
innovative 
technology that can 
conserve 
water, 
energy 
and 
increase 
profits. 
Thus, drip irrigation 
may 
help 
solve 
three of the most 
important problems 
of 
irrigated 
sugarcane - water 
scarcity, 
rising 
pumping 
(energy) 
costs 
and 
depressed 
farm 
profits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Surface Drip Subsurface Drip 
 
Whether or not drip will be successful depends on a host of agronomic, engineering 
and economic factors. "Drip irrigation is defined as the precise, slow and frequent 
application of water through point or line source emitters on or below the soil surface at

a small operating pressure (20-200 kPa) and at a low discharge rate (0.6 to 20 LPH), 
resulting in partial wetting of the soil surface. 
 
In the literature, "trickle" is used interchangeably with "drip". Most popular drip versions 
used in sugarcane are surface and subsurface drip. 
Surface Drip: The application of water to the soil surface as drops or a tiny 
stream through emitters placed at predetermined distance along the drip lateral 
is termed as surface drip irrigation. It can be of two types - online or integral 
type surface drip system. Integral dripline is recommended for sugarcane. 
Subsurface Drip (SDI): The application of water below the soil surface through 
emitters molded on the inner wall of the dripline, with discharge rates (1.0 - 3.0 
LPH) generally in the same range as integral surface drip irrigation. This method 
of water application is different from and not to be confused with the method 
where the root zone is irrigated by water table control, herein referred to as 
subirrigation. The integral dripline (thin or thick-walled) is installed at some 
predetermined depth in the soil depending on the soil type and crop 
requirements. There are two main types of SDI - "one crop" and "multicrop". 
Adoption of drip irrigation (surface or subsurface) system in sugarcane cultivation is 
technically feasible, economically viable and beneficial in many ways: 
Higher water application uniformity 
Deceased energy costs due to reduced pumping time to irrigate a given design 
area 
Saving in water up to 45 to 50% contributing to higher water use efficiency 
Saving in fertilizer (25 to 30%) due to fertigation consequently improved fertilizer 
use efficiency i.e., agronomic efficiency, physiological efficiency and apparent 
recovery fraction 
Less weed growth and saving in labour due fewer weed control, fertigation & 
plant protection operations 
Less pest & disease incidence due to better field sanitation 
Optimum soil water air relations contributing to better germination, uniform field 
emergence and maintenance of optimum plant population 
Early harvesting and more ratoons 
Day/Night irrigation scheduling is possible 
Facilitates growing of crop on marginal soils due to frequent irrigations and 
fertigation 
High frequency irrigation, micro-leaching and higher soil water potential enables 
use of saline water for irrigation 
Higher cane and sugar yields

Effective drip technology requires a more intense application of crop, soil, climatic, 
engineering, and economic factors than is usually present with furrow irrigation. New 
management perspectives and skills are required t planting configuration, land 
preparation, drip design features, irrigation scheduling, fertigation, operation & 
maintenance of the system. 
 
The new management practices induced with drip technology seem to have 
significantly helped increase cane and sugar yields. Planting configuration and drip 
design features will be dealt in this section while others will dealt in different sections. 
 
Planting Configuration 
Widely followed sugarcane planting systems are viz., ridge and furrow system in 
tropical region and flat system in sub-tropical region. The spacing of crop rows ranges 
from 0.60 m to 1.5 m. The most common spacing followed is 0.90 m in ridge and 
furrow system as shown in Fig, because it facilitates easy irrigation and solid support 
when proper earthing up is done. 
 
However, when the crop is raised under drip method of irrigation modifying the 
conventional ridge and furrow planting system to a paired-row or dual row system 
without sacrificing the plant population per unit area proved to be physiologically 
efficient and cost effective. 
 
The spacing of paired-rows is dependent upon the soil type and planting season. 
Wider spacing is advisable in fine textured soils under high fertility conditions and for 
long duration crop (&gt; 13 to 16 months) and high tillering varieties. While in coarse 
textured soils with poor soil fertility status, short season crop (10-12 months) and shy 
tillering varieties narrow spacing is desirable. 
 
The paired-row planting pattern and associated spacing requirements both under 
surface and subsurface drip irrigation are depicted in the picture. 
These planting patterns are for guidance only. If necessary, adjustments in planting 
patterns may have to be made depending upon the variety, planting season, and 
fertility status and soil textural conditions of the region. 
 
Drip Design Guidelines - Summary 
The summary of drip guidelines recommended for sugarcane in different countries 
based on varietal characteristics, soil type, management, cost-effectiveness, and a 
local condition is given in Table 3. 
 
Table 3. Sugarcane: Drip Design Guidelines 
Distance (m) 
Planting 
pattern 
Drip 
system 
Two 
rows of 
a pair 
Two 
paired 
rows / two 
Two 
driplines 
Dripline 
installation 
depth (cm) 
Emitter 
distance 
(m) 
Discharge 
(LPH)

rows 
Single row 
Surface 
--- 
1.2 to 1.5
1.2 to 1.5 
--- 
0.4 to 0.6 
1.0 to 3.0 
Paired row 
Surface 
0.4 to 1.0 1.4 to 2.0 
1.8 to 2.5 
--- 
0.4 to 0.6 
1.0 to 3.0 
Paired row 
SDI 
0.4 to 1.0 1.4 to 2.0 
1.8 to 2.5 
0.15 to 0.30 
0.4 to 0.6 
1.0 to 2.3 
 
Design of Drip Irrigation Scheme 
Drip irrigation offers the grower the potential for increasing cane yields & quality; and 
opportunity for improving irrigation & energy efficiencies in irrigated sugarcane. 
However, to realize this potential and opportunity, drip irrigation schemes must be 
designed, installed and managed correctly. 
 
Design Factors 
The main technical factors that should be considered when designing a drip irrigation 
scheme for sugarcane are as follows: 
Peak crop water requirements 
Area of fields to be irrigated 
Availability of irrigation water and power 
Irrigation water quality 
Soil characteristics 
Land topography 
Components of a Drip Irrigation System 
The pictures shows the main components of a drip irrigation system. 
 
 
 
 
Agronomic Advantages of Drip Over Sprinkler & Furrow Irrigation 
 
System Capacity 
Drip irrigation system must have a design capacity adequate to satisfy the peak crop 
water requirement of the crop to be irrigated within the design area. The capacity shall 
include an allowance for water losses that may occur during application periods. The 
system shall have the capacity to apply a stated amount of water in the design area in

a specified net operation period. The system should have a minimum design capacity 
sufficient to deliver the peak daily crop water requirements in about 90% of the time 
available or not more than 22 h of operation or not more than the power availability 
period per day. 
 
Operating Pressure 
The design operating pressure shall be in accordance with the recommendations of 
the manufacturer. The system operating pressure must compensate for pressure 
losses through system components and field elevation effects. 
 
Equipment Selection Control Head 
The control head station includes facilities for water measurement, filtration & 
treatment, injection of fertilizers & chemicals, flow and pressure control, timing of 
application and backflow prevention. 
 
Filtration System 
Filtration system is the assembly of independently controlled physical components 
used to remove suspended solids from irrigation water. Filtration of irrigation water is 
vital for drip irrigation schemes in order to avoid blockage of emitters as the internal 
passages of emitters are very small. 
 
The choice of filter depends mainly on the kind of impurities contained in the water and 
the degree of filtration required on the emitter. It is recommended that Netafim expert 
advise is sought on water quality analysis for pH, suspended solids, dissolved solids 
and bacterial population. Filtration system design recommendations should include 
location, size, specification of allowable suspended material sizes, types of filters, and 
maintenance requirements. 
Location: A primary filter shall be located after the pump and fertigation unit to remove 
both large and fine particles from the flow. Secondary filters may be used downstream 
from the primary filter to remove any particles, which may pass through the primary 
filter during normal or cleaning operations. When secondary filters are used, the size of 
the openings is usually larger than that of the primary filter to minimize needed 
attention. 
 
Size: Filter flow openings shall be sufficiently small to prevent the passage of 
unwanted particles into the system. The filter size should be based on the diameter of 
the emitter opening or the type and size of contaminants to be filtered. The capacity of 
the filter should be sufficiently large to permit the rated flow without frequent cleaning. 
Filters that are to be cleaned by hand should not require more than daily maintenance. 
The size should be the most economical with the lowest friction losses ranging from 
0.3 to 0.5 bars. 
 
Types: Filtration may be accomplished through the use of different types of filters viz., 
screen (for inorganic impurities and moderate quality water or following a primary

filtration with sand or disc filters) disc (for removal of impurities of organic and 
inorganic origin, algae included), hydrocyclones (for separation of sand or silt from well 
or river water) and media or sand filters (for open wells, open reservoirs, streams etc). 
 
Fertigation Unit 
Drip irrigation systems provide a convenient method of applying fertilizers and 
chemicals with the irrigation water using special fertigation devices. The fertigation 
devices include pressure differential systems (fertilizer tank), suction produced by a 
venturi principle (venturi injectors) and pumps (diaphragm or piston or electrically 
operated). The fertilizer unit is an integral part of control head. 
 
The important considerations are injection method & rate, concentration, storage tank 
capacity, contamination of water supply, reliability and accuracy of operation, warranty 
and service, automation suitability, field performance, price including acquisition and 
maintenance cost, life expectancy etc 
 
Water Carrier System - Supply Lines, Main Lines and Submains 
The design objective of supply lines, main lines and submains is to deliver the 
required, pressurized quantity of water to the laterals (driplines) as efficiently as 
possible. The cane grower should attempt to minimize the total cost of the supply lines 
and mainlines needed to meet the engineering specifications. 
 
Sub-main pipe should be based upon capacity requirement, maintenance cost, 
investment cost and pressure uniformity. Buried pipelines are less subject to damage 
than surface lines and do not require special handling during the crop season. 
Appropriate risers and valves exist for each kind of pipe. Supply lines, main lines and 
submains generally account for 20-35% of total investment cost/ha. 
 
Riser Assembly 
Connected to the water carrier system and located at each field block is a riser 
assembly. Typically, this will consist of a control valve, a disc filter, a pressure relief 
valve and pressure regulator, a water pressure test point, and an air release valve. 
 
The volume of water applied to each field block is controlled by the opening and 
closing of valves. These can be simple gate valves, semi-automatic volumetric valves 
or automatic solenoid valves connected back to a central controller. Although semi-
automatic and automatic systems reduce labour running costs and facilitate night-time 
irrigation, they are more expensive. It is recommended, wherever possible, that cane 
growers choose the simplest control systems and systems that are easy to use and 
easy to maintain. 
 
The air relief valve, which may also act as a water pressure test point, is necessary to 
prevent water hammers whenever air is escaping from the water carrier system. The

discharge of driplines other than those with pressure compensating emitters is 
dependent on the water pressure in the dripline. 
 
The pressure regulator at the riser is used to maintain water pressure in the driplines at 
the level recommended by the Netafim design engineer. It should be noted that riser 
assemblies should be protected from damage through vandalism, cane fires and infield 
operations such as mechanical harvesting, loading etc. A concrete box with a metal 
door usually provides sufficient protection. 
 
 
Dripline Type 
 
In most sugarcane drip irrigated systems water is conducted from the riser assembly 
into a sub-main into which the driplines are connected. Although there are many 
different types of Netafim driplines that are used in sugarcane, they are all designed to 
distribute water uniformly over the entire design area of a given field block. A variation 
in discharge rate from dripline emitters that is acceptable is of the order of 
± 8-10%. 
 
Driplines vary in emitter design, quality, uniformity of discharge and cost. From the 
outside, most integral driplines look alike. Yet there are major differences between 
products, particularly emitters. Consistent and superior performance of an integral 
dripline lies in the quality of its emitter. Several years of experience has shown that the 
following factors should be considered when selecting a dripline that is to remain either 
on surface or buried throughout a complete life cycle of a plant cane and 2 to 8 
ratoons.

Technical Factors 
Precision-molded emitters for uniform and constant low discharge of water & 
nutrients 
Wider and deeper flow path cross section for clog free discharge of water 
Sharp teeth for increased turbulence, flow control & flushing the emitter 
Seamless pipe construction for maintaining greater tensile and burst strength 
facilitating higher operation pressures for longer runs 
Raised filter inlet emitter for drawing clean water from the pipe center to prevent 
clogging 
Emitters with filters to prevent plugging, less maintenance & longer life. 
Flexible emitter spacing and choice of flow rates to suit different sugarcane 
varieties, planting patterns, soil types etc. 
Low emitter exponent and manufacturing coefficient of variation 
Flow rate insensitive to temperature differences 
Insect resistance, resistance to sunlight, no moving parts and anticipated life 
Driplines come in a range of wall thicknesses. Construction and wall thickness 
of the dripline should be sufficient to reduce the risk of the pipe being crushed or 
pinched by cane stools or roots or by in-field traffic such as mechanical loaders, 
farm machinery etc. Recommended successful driplines are given in Table 4: 
Flap mechanism to prevent the risk of sucking of fine soil material into the 
dripline emitters leading to plugging 
Nominal diameters are 16 mm and 22mm. A larger diameter will allow the 
supply of water to a greater length of dripline before pressure drops below 
design requirements. This results in saving in the cost of submains. 
Availability of machinery to recover the driplines at the end of the crop cycle and 
used for a second crop cycle if possible after refurbishment 
Table 4. Recommended Driplines for Sugarcane 
Dripline thickness 
Category 
Crop type 
34 mil (0.8 mm) - 47 mil 
 
 
 
 
(1.2 mm) 
Thickwalled & 
 
 
 
 
PC or Non PC 
For surface and subsurface drip, rougher 
soil conditions and where insect damage is 
expected. Lasts 10+ years with proper 
operation and maintenance techniques 
12 mil (0.3 mm) - 25 mil 
 
 
 
(0.63 mm) 
Thinwalled & 
 
 
 
PC or Non PC 
For 
subsurface 
drip 
and 
good 
soil 
conditions. Lasts for 3-5 years. 
 
Agronomic Factors 
Both surface and subsurface drip irrigation system were technically feasible in 
sugarcane under diverse conditions

Availability of dripline types for application in sugarcane viz., thick-walled for 
surface drip irrigated cane, thin-walled for subsurface drip irrigated cane, non-
pressure compensated driplines for leveled land, pressure compensated 
driplines for undulated topography etc 
Subsurface drip irrigation was superior over surface drip in terms of water 
availability, uniformity, water use, water use efficiency, cane yield and quality, 
management etc 
Paired row or dual row or pineapple planting configuration with variable 
spacings depending upon the soil texture with one dripline for every two rows 
was found to be technically feasible, economically viable and potentially 
profitable in comparison to rectangular single row planting configuration with 
dripline for every crop row. 
Driplines can be successfully buried before planting cane with out waiting for 
planting and germination of cane. 
Cane germination and field emergence was adequate to give satisfactory plant 
stand both under surface and SDI systems with out any supplementary use of 
surface furrow or overhead sprinkler system for germination irrigation 
Emitter Spacing, Discharge Rate and Depth of Placement 
The area wetted as a percent of the total crop area i.e., wetting patterns that are 
obtained under drip irrigation depend on a number of factors which include the soil 
hydraulic properties, emitter spacing, dripline placement with respect to the cane rows, 
emitter discharge rate, planting configuration, crop evapotranspiration and irrigation 
regime. The following information concerning wetting patterns has been obtained by 
Netafim Agronomists & Design Engineers from several years of experimentation and 
experience under diverse agro-ecological conditions: 
Emitter Spacings: Spacings of 0.3 to 0.75 m and discharge rates of 1.0 to 3 
LPH were acceptable to most soil types on which sugarcane is grown in 
different countries today. It is recommended, however, that the lower discharge 
rates and closer emitter spacings are used on light textured sandy, loamy 
sands, sandy loams, which have low water retention capacities. Conversely 
higher discharge rates and wider emitter spacings are recommended for 
medium to heavy textured soils viz., loamy, silty clay, clay loams and clays. 
Emitter discharge rate should not create runoff within the immediate application 
area. In fields with varying soil types, this criterion shall apply to the soil with the 
lowest infiltration rate unless it is less than 15% of the area irrigated. It should 
be noted that wider the spacing between emitters the more difficult it is to 
achieve uniform wetted strip and in turn uniform cane germination and field 
emergence.

• 
Wetted Area: The area wetted as a percent of the total cane cropped area 
ranged from a low of 28% in widely spaced paired-row planting configuration 
with dripline for every two rows (placed midway in between two rows) to a high 
of 60% in single-row rectangular planting configuration with dripline for each 
row. 
• 
Depth of Placement: Subsurface dripline placement is the most popular 
technique used in cane. Driplines buried underground are protected from 
mechanical damage. Depth of placement is critical to optimize the potential for 
drip irrigation. Soil type and topography dictates depth of placement. Light 
textured soils (sandy, loamy sand and sandy loam) require shallow depth of 
dripline placement so that water is not lost by deep percolation. Medium to 
heavy textured soils (loamy, silty loam, clay loam & clay) which will wet-up 
laterally 
(larger 
wetted 
diameter) 
can 
have 
deeper 
placement. 
This is an advantage in minimizing damage to dripline from insects and rats and 
intrusion of roots; it also allows planting over the top of the dripline. In sloping 
blocks dripline placement can be offset to the uphill side of the sett so that water 
will gravity drain to the root zone but care must be taken to avoid damage 
during cultivation. The overall aim when considering dripline placement is to 
maintain the most efficient supply of water to the effective root zone of the plant 
under the conditions of soil type, soil depth, topography and any other limiting 
conditions (Table 5). Shallow depth can cause crushing of driplines by 
mechanical loaders and cane fires. Shallow depth of installation of driplines may 
also lead to irrigation water being lost to direct soil evaporation as a result of 
puddles formed above the driplines during irrigation. Try not to allow water to 
reach the soil surface as it will allow germination of weed seeds. In dry 
conditions it will be beneficial to wet-up to the surface after harvest to assist in 
ratooning. 
Table 5. Depth o Placement of Dripline in SDI System 
Soil 
texture 
Placement 
depth below 
ground 
Remarks 
 
Loamy 
sand 
& 
Sandy 
loam 
 
15 to 20 cm 
 
These soils benefit from short & frequent 
irrigations. Irrigate to refill the soil profile to 
effective rooting depth only. Note that drip 
irrigation wets only a narrow band under the 
dripline in these soils and the storage 
capacity of the soil is small. 
Silty loam 
& 
Clay 
loam 
 
20 to 25 cm 
 
Less frequent irrigations, larger volume of 
irrigation water application can be allowed 
since water spreads laterally more into the 
root zone. Water storage capacity of the 
soils is high.

Clay soil 
 
 
25 to 30 cm 
 
Less frequent, longer irrigation cycles and 
larger volume of irrigation water application 
can be allowed since water spreads laterally 
more into the root zone. Water storage 
capacity of the soils is very high. However, 
watch 
for 
ill-drained 
conditions 
and 
waterlogging in the crop root zone. 
 
Economic and Managerial Design Factors 
The main managerial and economic factors that should be considered when designing 
a SDI for sugarcane are as follows: 
Potential yield and CCS increment 
Cost of subsurface drip irrigation system 
Cost of installation and interest rate 
Operation and maintenance costs 
Availability and cost of water 
Availability and cost of trained skilled staff to operate the drip scheme 
Price of sugar 
 Other Factors 
Water - Source, availability and quality evaluation for determining filtration 
system type, maintenance of irrigation system, crop management and selection 
of fertilizers 
Soil evaluation for fertility status, clay content, CEC, bulk density etc for 
determining the fertigation programme 
Determination of moisture holding properties and evaporative demand of the 
atmosphere for irrigation scheduling 
Contour survey for selection of dripline type (pressure compensating or non-
pressure compensating), to determine dripline length and sub-main spacing 
Soil characteristics for determining appropriate emitter spacing and depth of 
dripline placement 
Installation 
It is essential that high quality installation and maintenance is adopted for 
dripline which is installed below ground. The following points are important 
when installing a system:Follow the Netafim Design Engineer instructions 
scrupulously, for example when glueing PVC pipes, installing mains & submains 
as pipe sizes will have been dimensioned to enable specified flow rates and 
pressure throughout the system. 
After installation, check each part of the system carefully for leaks as these will 
cause pressure problems at the tail end of the scheme

Check every dripline being injected for correct placement, orientation and depth 
and to ensure there is no crimping of the riser, which connects dripline to the 
submain. 
Bury mains and submains to ensure that rocks in the back fill do not damage 
pipes. 
After hook-up, partially backfill portions of submains and pressure test before 
completely backfilling trenches. 
Flush out the water carrier system to remove extraneous material before riser 
assemblies and driplines are connected. 
Check water pressure at the risers and dripline flow rates: if these are not 
according to the specification there has been a problem at either the design or 
the installation stage. 
Dripline Monitoring 
Driplines and emitters, for both surface and subsurface systems, are subject to 
plugging and breaking with passing time. Microbial and inorganic deposits are the two 
principal causes of emitter plugging. Algae and bacterial slimes are of particular 
concern when water is pumped directly from an irrigation ditch, reservoir, open well, or 
natural channel. Even with sand media filters, microorganisms may grow in the lines 
and become a major problem. 
 
Maintaining a pH of 6.5-6.8 with periodical acid injection reduces precipitation of 
inorganic compounds (phosphates, calcium, bicarbonates) and discourages algae 
growth. Chlorine, also, may be used to treat algae. Shock treatments, with acids 
(sulphuric, hydrochloric and phosphoric), which periodically reduce pH to 2-3 also kill 
algae and eliminate some inorganic plugging. 
 
Acidified fertilizers are used or are being developed to deal with emitter plugging. 
Rodents, rabbits, and coyotes may chew holes in driplines, roots may clog subsurface 
emitters, or lines may be mechanically damaged. For the most part, drip irrigated cane 
growers world over have nor found these to be major problems. Broken or damaged 
lines (from all causes) have affected less than 4% of the total system. Broken lines are 
usually easily and inexpensively repaired. 
 
Chemicals (like Trifluralin) help keep roots from clogging emitters under SDI. And 
subsurface driplines are better protected from mechanical as well as rodent damage 
with deeper line placement and more careful machinery operation in the field. 
 
Improved Varieties 
 
Variety is the pivot around which entire production system revolves. Therefore, 
scientific sugarcane cultivation must start with choosing an appropriate variety for the

agro-climatic zone, soil type and season concerned. Improved varieties are now 
available for almost all the growing conditions in the world. 
 
New varieties are continuously evolved by the Sugarcane Breeding Institutes, 
Agricultural Universities, and Sugarcane Research & Development Centres world over. 
It would be therefore worthwhile for the growers to manipulate the environment in such 
a way as to bring out the maximum expression of the yield potential possessed by 
these varieties. 
 
Classification of Sugarcane Varieties 
Sugarcane is considered to be mature and ready for harvesting if it attains over 16% 
sucrose and 85% purity of cane juice. The varieties, which attain such level at 12, 14 
and 16 months age, if planted in December/January are broadly classified as early, 
mid-late and late maturing types. 
 
The terms early, mid and late are, therefore, not natural classfication and only 
represent relative grading among varieties under comparative assessment. The main 
idea of maturity-based classification of varieties is to facilitate harvesting of variety at 
proper time in order to enhance over all recovery and consequently the sugar 
production. 
 
Proper Varietal Proportions 
Proper proportion of area should be kept under early, mid-late and late maturing 
varieties to ensure proper supply of cane of desired quality throughout the crushing 
period. Proper varietal proportion will not only increase the total sugar recovery but will 
also maintain it throughout the crushing season. a ration of 30:40:30 has been 
suggested for early, mid-late and late ripening varieties for optimal performance and 
utilization of the crushing seasons. 
 
With in a maturity group, there should be more than one variety in the factory zone. It 
is for simple reason of providing insurance against epidemic of pest or disease of the 
crop, which may otherwise completely wipe out the crop. 
 
Choice of Variety 
Important considerations in choosing an appropriate variety include cane yield, juice 
quality, age group, suitability to the growing conditions viz., soil type, irrigation regime, 
season etc., ratooning potential, resistance to pests & diseases and adverse growing 
conditions. 
Some of the desirable varietal attributes one should look for are high yield potential, 
high sucrose content, good field appearance, higher tillering capacity, medium thick to 
thick and long stalks, long internodes, erect growing habit, non-lodging, non-flowering 
or shy flowering, good ratooning ability, absence of spines on the leaf sheaths, 
absence of splits on the stalks, less bud sprouting and resistance to prevailing local 
problems.

Varietal defects include lodging tendency, flowering propensity, disease susceptibility, 
cavity development, high fibre content, big and bulged buds which may be damaged 
during transportation, heavy spines on leaf sheath, drying of green top at maturity, tight 
leaf clasping, presence of heavy pith, growth cracks or splits. 
These defects may appear as minor and insignificant, at first, but they understandably 
draw the growers attention when the varieties come into cultivation. 
 World over sugarcane cultivars receive a designation, which corresponds to the 
country wherein they were developed/obtained. A few examples could be given: 
Argentina - NA; South Africa - N; Australia - Q; Brazil - CB, IAC, PB, RB and SP; 
Colombia - ICA; Cuba - C; USA - CP; Philippines - Phil; India - Co; Indonesia - POJ; 
Peru - PCJ; Egypt - E; Puerto Rico - PR; and Mauritius - M. Three or more digits 
usually follow the sigla. Improved varieties under cultivation in major sugarcane 
countries are given in Table 6. 
 
Table 6. Sugarcane: Improved Varieties Under Cultivation in Different Countries 
S.No. 
Country 
Improved varieties 

Brazil 
SP-77-5181, RB-85-5453, SP-81-3250, SP-80-1816, 
RB-85-5113, SP-80-3280, RB-1049, SSSP-71-5181, 
BR85-5113, BR72-454, BR83-5486 

India 
CoS.687, 
CoPant.84211, 
CoJ.64, 
CoLk.8001, 
Co.1148, CoS.767, CoS.802, CoC.671, CoC.85061, 
Co.8021, Co.6304, 
Co.1148, CoJ.79, CoS.767, 
Co.740, CoM.7125, Co.7527, CoC.671, Co.740, 
Co.8014, 
Co.7804, 
Co.740, 
Co.8338, 
Co.6806, 
Co.6304, Co.7527, Co.6907, Co.7805, Co.7219, 
Co.7805, Co.8011 

Louisiana CP 65-357, CP 70-321, CP 72-370, CP 74-383, CP 
79-318, LCP 82-89, LHo 83-153, LCP 85-384, HoCP 
85-845, LCP 86-454, HoCP 91-555 

Thailand 
91- 2 -29, K 92 -181, K 95 -84 

China 

Hawaii 

South 
Africa 
CP 66 - 1043, NCo 376, N 12, N 14, N 16, N 17, N 19, 
N 21, N 22, N 23, N 24, N 25, N 26, N 27, N 28, N 29, 
N 30, N 31, N 32, N 33, N 35, N 36, N 37, N 39, N 40, 
N 41 
 
 
Land Preparation 
 
For higher sugarcane yields, providing optimum soil environment is an essential pre-
requisite since the crop remains in the field for about 5 to 6 years due to the practice of 
raising several ratoon crops.

Good Land Preparation Improper Land Preparation 
 
Further intense mechanization involving traffic of heavy machinery from planting to 
harvesting and transporting to the sugar mill or distillery, can cause the deterioration of 
soil physical conditions. This translates into soil compaction with a cohort of harmful 
side effects viz., reduction in storage & movement of air and water, mechanical 
difficulty for root growth and difficulty in absorption of nutrients from the soil itself and 
from the fertilizer. 
 
Therefore a through land preparation every time a new crop is planted is absolutely 
essential to bring the soil to fine tilth for proper germination of the sets and field 
emergence and root growth. 
 
Tillage is the physical manipulation of the soil with appropriate implements to loosen 
the surface soil layer. 
 
Objectives of Land Preparation 
To prepare a seed bed which permits optimal soil water air relations 
Good physical conditions for early root penetration and proliferation 
To incorporate preceding crop residues and organic manures 
To destroy weeds and hibernating pest & disease organisms 
To facilitate proper soil chemical and microbial activity 
Tillage operations through tractor drawn implements are most ideal and quick. For 
initial ploughing use either mould board plough or disc plough. Whenever, soil turning 
is desired, a mould board plough should be used. 
 
On the other hand when the soil is hard, uneven and composed of crop stubbles, a 
disc plough is preferable. Ploughing at optimum soil moisture content is very essential 
to achieve tilth. Too wet soil interrupts movement of machinery and causes destruction 
of soil structure.

On the other hand too dry soil will not allow tynes to penetrate deep and results in 
frequent mechanical breakdowns, increased power requirement and cloddy soil 
surface affecting soil water air relations. 
 
 
 Without Subsoiling With Subsoiling 
 
The secondary tillage operations are carried out using disc harrows, tyned harrows or 
rotavator. The rotavator is a very useful multi purpose implement, which cuts the crop 
residues, shred them and incorporates in the soil in one pass. Use mechanical 
methods (subsoiling or chiseling or deep ploughing) or biological means (green 
manuring between last ratoon harvest and start of a new crop) to destroy the 
compacted layer and to allow roots to develop normally. Subsoiling was also shown to 
reduce fuel consumption, working time and facilitate optimum plant population. 
 
Steps in Land Preparation Involve the Following: 
Subsoiling or chiseling to a depth of 50 to 75 cm to break hard compact sub-pan 
layer 
Ploughing to incorporate previous crop's crop residues and organic manures 
Discing to break clods 
Land shaping to provide the required gradient for draining excess water during 
rainy season 
Field layout - Construct ridges & furrows and shape them. Depth of furrows 
should be 25 cm. The furrow bottom should be loosened to about 10 cm. 
Provide drainage channels, which are deeper than the furrows along the field 
borders as well as within the field at regular intervals. Drainage channels are 
particularly important in the high rainfall areas to drain the excess water during 
rainy season. 
Table 7 summarizes the power requirement and output during land preparation.

Table 7. Sugarcane: Power Requirement and Work Ouput for Land Preparation 
 
Power requirement/ha 
Operation 
kWatts 
Diesel 
(Litres/ha) 
Output 
(ha/hr) 
Pre-discing 

2.5 
Ripping 

0.5 
Ploughing 

1.7 
Post-discing 

2.5 
Land leveling 

3.5 
Ridging 

0.5 
 
 
Planting Material 
 
Sugarcane is vegetatively propagated for commercial cultivation. Different kinds of 
planting materials viz., cane setts; settlings and bud chips are used for raising 
sugarcane crop. 
 
Cane Setts 
Stem cuttings or sections of the stalks are called "setts" or seed pieces. Each sett 
contains one or more buds. Always use fresh, genetically pure, pest and disease free 
setts as seed material. Generally, three bud setts are used for planting throughout the 
world, while in some areas two-bud setts are also used. 
 
Three Bud Sett (Source: Verma, 2004) 
 
Experimental evidence shows that germination percentage of 3-bud setts is higher 
than the setts having more or less than 3-buds. The middle bud of a 3-bud sett has the 
highest germinating capacity followed by top end bud and the bottom end bud, 
respectively (Verma, 2004). The middle bud has an advantage in germination 
because, as a non-terminal bud having nodes on either side, its moisture resources 
are better protected than those of the terminal buds.

Middle bud showing the highest germinating capacity in 3-Bud Sett 
(Source: Verma, 2004) 
 
Germination capacity of single-bud sett is very poor due to loss of moisture from cut 
ends on either side. Further the plants arising from single-bud setts also lack vigour 
and yield low as compared to those from three-budded setts. Thus the preference 
given to three-budded setts over single-bud setts is partly based on germination 
capacity and partly on initial vigour of the germinated plants and cane yield. 
 
If whole cane stalk is planted without being cut into setts, usually few buds at its top 
end germinate and the lower end buds remain inactive due to top dominance. The 
effect of top dominance is eliminated when stalk is cut into pieces. 
 
Settlings 
Cane setts with roots and shoots are known as settlings. Settlings can be raised either 
in nursery beds or in polythene bags. Single node settlings are used as a planting 
material in spaced transplanting technique of raising sugarcane crop. 
 
 
Single bud settling (Source: Verma, 2004) 
 
Bud Chips 
Little portion of stem with one bud is known as bud chip. Bud chips are used to raise 
settlings in nursery. They were found to produce a good crop when transplanted in 
main field. The principal advantage of bud chips is substantial saving in seed material.

Seed requirement is reduced to less than one ton per ha. Adopting the following 
procedure raises settlings from bud chips: 
Prepare the bud chips from whole cane using a sharp edged knife in such a way 
that each bud has a little portion of stem 
Plant the bud chips on raised nursery beds adopting a inter-row spacing of 7.5 
cm at the rate of 300 buds/m2 
Alternatively nursery can be raised in polybags of 15 cm x 10 cm size 
Fill the polybags with homogeneous mixture of equal quantity of soil, sand and 
well rotten compost 
Plant the bud chips in polybags with the bud facing upwards and cover with soil 
mixture to avoid drying of the bud 
Bottom of the bags should have holes to facilitate drainage 
Ensure regular watering of bags or nursery area 
Settlings are ready in 5 - 8 weeks for transplanting in the main field 
Under good management conditions establishment of transplanted seedlings in 
the main field is high (90-100%) 
Raising of Seed Cane Crop 
The normal practice in many parts of the world is to 
use commercial crop of sugarcane for seed purposes. 
Characteristics for good seed are seldom taken into 
consideration. Many growers do not care for seed 
quality and many of those who do, select the seed only 
at the sett cutting and planting stage. This is not 
enough. If a grower wants to be sure of getting good 
and disease free seed cane he should raise the seed 
crop separately. This crop should be kept completely 
free from pests and diseases by constant field scouting 
from the very beginning. 
 
Moreover, seed quality is not merely a matter of pest 
and disease freedom. Seed has to be in high water 
content and of good nutritional status. Neglect in 
raising good seed crop is one of the major defects in 
sugarcane cultivation all over the world. (In the picture above: Bud Chip) 
 
Use of sugarcane seed from the commercial crop has been responsible for rapid 
multiplication of a large number of diseases like red rot, wilt, smut, ratoon stunting and 
grassy shoot which adversely affect the cane yield and quality. It is, therefore, raising 
of healthy and vigorous sugarcane crops for seed purpose is essential and 
recommended.

Select an upland field for raising seed crop with no soil problems (soil salinity, 
acidity, waterlogging etc) and adequate irrigation facility 
Prepare the soil thoroughly and incorporate 20-25 tons/ha of FYM 15 days 
before planting 
Provide field channels and field drains to prevent rain water traversing from 
adjoining field to check spread of red rot disease 
Select seed material from previously raised seed nursery crop and prepare the 
setts. Use only sterilized setts to avoid transmission of certain diseases like 
RSD and GSD 
Give heat treatment (heat therapy) to eliminate seed borne diseases and 
organomercurial treatment to protect the setts from soil borne diseases to 
ensure better germination 
Adopt narrow spacing of 75 cm to obtain higher yield of setts per unit area 
Use 25% higher seed rate than normal cane crop 
Apply higher nutrient dose of 250 kg N + 75 kg P2O5 + 125 kg K2O/ha 
Irrigate the crop at optimum levels to avoid any water stress during crop life 
taking in to account evaporative demand of the atmosphere (ETo) and Crop 
characteristics (Kc) at different crop growth stages 
Provide weed free environment for better growth of the crop and also to avoid 
infestation of pests and diseases 
Adopt field scouting for timely control of pests and diseases 
Rouge out the affected clumps and plants of other varieties 
Protect the crop from lodging, binding and propping 
Crop is ready in 7 - 8 months. Setts obtained from such crop contain healthy 
and sound buds, higher moisture content, adequate nutrients, higher amounts 
of reducing sugars, therefore, establish quickly and grow vigorously thus 
ensuring a good commercial main field crop. 
Preparation of Setts for Main Field Planting 
Harvest the seed crop one day before planting to obtain higher percentage and 
uniform germination. 
Prepare the setts always one day before planting by giving sett treatment. 
Planting material or seed cane should be free from aerial roots and splits. 
Avoid damage to buds while cutting setts. 
Change the seed material after every two to three seasons. In case if it is 
inevitable to use mature cane as seed, the top one-third portion can be used 
satisfactorily. 
Ideal Seed Cane 
Always use seed cane obtained from a seed crop of 7-8 months 
Free from disease and pest infestation like red rot, wilt, smut, ratoon stunting 
disease etc 
Possesses healthy buds without any damage in handling and transport.

Buds with higher moisture content, adequate nutrients, higher amount of 
reducing sugars and viability. 
Free from aerial roots and splits. 
Pure in quality. 
Seed Cane Treatment 
Objective: To protect the 
crop 
from 
soil 
borne 
diseases 
causing 
pathogens, which usually 
gain entry into the setts 
through 
the 
cut 
ends 
following 
planting 
and 
cause 
sett 
rotting 
and 
damage 
to 
buds, 
thus 
affecting germination. 
Most farmers don't treat the 
setts before planting which 
results low plant population 
per unit area consequently 
reducing the yield 
 
In the Pictures above: Sett treatment with fungicide against soil borne pathogens + moist hot 
air treatment of setts against seed borne diseases 
In the picture below: Termite damaged setts (Source: Verma, 2004)

Treat the setts soon after cutting in 0.1% (at 1g/liter) Carbendazim solution for 
15 minutes. 
Three important diseases viz., grassy shoot disease, smut and ratoon stunting 
disease are carried forward through seed cane material. These diseases lead to 
progressive decline in yields and degenerate sugarcane varieties. For control of 
these diseases treat the seed material (setts) with moist hot air at 52°c for 30 
minutes. 
To control termites early shoot borer and scale insects treat the setts in a 
systematic insecticide viz. Malathion 50EC (at 2 ml/liter) or Dimethoate 30EC (at 
3 ml/liter) for 15 minutes. 
Seed Rate 
Under drip irrigated paired-row 
system of planting [(0.6m + 
1.20m) x 0.12m], about 60,000 
two-bud or 40,000 three-bud 
treated setts would be required 
to plant one ha of land. With 
proper germination of buds, 
this seed rate is adequate to 
give a gapless stand and raise 
a successful crop. 
 
Nearly 10-12 tons of seed 
cane is required to plant one ha of field. However, it is better always to go by number 
of setts per ha rather than weight basis as sett weight in sugarcane varies largely with 
varieties. 
 
Measures to obtain higher germination 
Some important yet simple measures to obtain higher uniform plant population are as 
follows: 
Using quality setts as 
seed material obtained 
from a short seed crop 
devoid of any primary 
infection 
Using 
preferably 
two 
eye bud setts instead of 
three bud setts as seed 
material 
Careful preparation of 
setts without damaging 
the buds or setts

Using sterilized knives for preparing setts to avoid transmission of root stunting 
and grassy shoot diseases 
Planting freshly prepared and treated setts 
Giving adequate and frequent irrigation's during germination phase 
Control of weeds through pre-emergence herbicides 
Seed treatment with fungicide and pesticides 
Transplanting Technique 
 
Seedlings are raised in a nursery bed using single bud setts. When the seedlings are 
of about 6 week old, they are transplanted in the prepared main field. 
 
In the pictures on the right and below (Source: Verma, 2004): 
• Single bud sett nursery 
• Single bud sett settlings from nursery for transplanting in main field 
• Transplanting In main field 
 
Advantages 
Saving in the seed cost as the seed requirement is only about 2-3 tons/ha 
against the normal seed requirement of 10-12 tons/ha.

Synchronous 
tillering 
leading 
to uniform growth 
and maturity of 
stalk population, 
which 
usually 
gives better yield 
and 
sugar 
recovery. 
Sufficient time for 
main 
field 
preparation 
Saving in water 
and fertilizer 
Better weed management 
 
Planting Time 
 
Sugarcane is grown under diverse agro-climatic conditions in the world. Therefore 
there is a considerable variation in the planting dates. The optimum planting periods in 
different countries are presented in Table 8. 
 
Table 8. Recommended Planting Time in Different Countries 
S.No. 
Country 
Season 
Planting time 
Central-South 
May to October 

Brazil 
Northeastern 
September to March 
Tropical 
October to March 

India 
Subtropical 
September to April 

China 
November to April 
Hawaii 
Year round 

USA 
Southeastern 
August to March 

Mexico 
November to June 

South Africa 
May to November 

Australia 
June to December 

Argentina 
May to November 

Cuba 
November to May 

Thailand 
June to July and November 

Philippines 
October to May 

Pakistan 
February to March

Machinery Planting 
Due to increase in labour scarcity use of cane planting machinery is on the rise in 
different countries not only to achieve efficiency in planting operation but also to save 
fuel expenses and time to cover large areas. Several types of planting machinery have 
been developed in different countries to suit the local conditions. 
 
Research on depth of soil cover over seed cane indicates that soil cover in excess of 
four inches can cause yield losses. Growers should use a covering tool that will cover 
the cane without pushing the cane closer than the width it was planted. Packing of 
rows should be done immediately after covering. 
 
 
 
In the picture: Planted Cane and Sett Coverage Using Machine 
 
Germination Irrigation 
 
To 
get 
uniform 
and 
higher 
germination 
(sprouting) percentage of planted setts is quite a 
technique in drip irrigated cane production. This 
operation demands full attention of the farmer. 
 
In the picture: Subsurface dripline laying 
machine 
 
In the following paragraphs we explain the 
procedure to be adopted to get best results: 
 
• 
Prepare the main field to fine tilth

Lay the drip laterals (driplines) at 15 to 20 cm depth using SDI laying machine 
and test for their design performance. Under surface drip driplines are spread 
on the soil surface. 
Plant the treated two or three budded setts at 10-15 cm depth by planting 
machine adopting recommended planting pattern and spacing. 
 
Surface drip Subsurface drip 
After ensuring proper coverage of setts start the irrigation. Continue irrigation 
until a uniform wet band (not standing water) is formed along the dripline to a 
depth of not less than 30 to 40 cm. 
Depending upon the soil texture and soil tilth achieved during land preparation it 
would take about four to six hours. 
Examine the soil frequently at various places in the planting zone i.e, 10 to 15 
cm of soil depth, for ascertaining the moisture status. As the days pass on soil 
moisture content decreases. 
Depending upon the soil texture and the climatic conditions (i.e, evaporative 
demand of the atmosphere), in about 3 to 5 days the soil moisture content in the 
planting zone will deplete to a level not congenial for germination process of the 
cane. When this happens start the second round of irrigation in time so that the 
bud sprouting process is not interrupted. Continue the second irrigation 
operation similar to the first round i.e., until uniform wet moisture band is 
achieved. But this time the irrigation duration will be less may be 50% of the first 
irrigation cycle (i.e., 2 to 3 hours) to achieve the same level of moisture status 
and wetting pattern in the soil. However, this needs to be confirmed before 
terminating the irrigation. 
Normally after 3 to 4 such irrigation cycles an experienced grower can obtain a 
very high germination percentage and uniformity of growth by adopting the 
above-described method.

Poor soil conditions and improper land preparation affect but sprouting, 
germination and crop emergence. 
 
 
In the pictures above: 
Germination irrigation in surface drip to achieve a wetted strip 
Uniform emergence of sugarcane under drip irrigation 
 
Weed Management 
 
In sugarcane weeds have been estimated to cause 12 to 72 % reduction in cane yield 
depending upon the severity of infestation. 
 
The nature of weed problem in sugarcane cultivation is quite different from other field 
crops because of the following reasons 
Sugarcane is planted with a relatively wider row spacing 
The sugarcane growth is very slow in the initial stages. It takes about 30 - 45 
days to complete germination and another 60-75 days for developing full 
canopy cover 
The crop is grown under abundant water and nutrient supply conditions 
In ratoon crop very little preparatory tillage is taken up hence weeds that have 
established in the plant crop tend to flourish well 
Major weed flora observed in sugarcane fields are: Sedges- Cyprus rotundus; 
Grasses-Cynodon dactylon, Sorghum helepense, Panicum spp, Dactylocternium 
aegyptium, Broad leaved weeds - Chenapodium album, Convolvulus arvensis L., 
Amaranthus viridis L., Portulaca oleraceae L., Commelina bengalensis L., Trianthema 
portulacastrum L. 
 
Weeds flora in sugarcane field besides competing for moisture and light also remove 
about 4 times N and P and 2.5 times of K as compared to crop during the first 50-days

period. Weeds also harbour certain diseases and pests that attack sugarcane and thus 
lead to indirect losses. 
 
Doob grass (Cynodon dactylon), the cogan grass (Imperata cylindrica) are known to 
play as alternate hosts to ratoon stunting disease of sugarcane. Thus weeds 
essentially harm young sugarcane sprouts by depriving them of moisture, nutrients and 
sunlight. Poor growth of cane resulting from weed infestation also affects quality. 
 
Weeds that are present in the furrows i.e., along the cane rows cause more harm than 
those present in the inter-row spaces during early crop growth sub-periods. Thus the 
initial 90-120 days period of crop growth is considered as most critical period of weed 
competition. Therefore the weed management practice adopted should ensure a 
weed-free field condition for the first 3-4 months period. 
 
 
 
In the picture: 
Weed control through herbicides pays in sugarcane (Source: Verma, 2004) 
 
Recommended Herbicides 
A chemical program for weed control can help Louisiana growers produce maximum 
yields of sugarcane when combined with sound agronomic practices such as timely 
cultivation, selection of adapted varieties, proper fertilization, and disease and insect 
control. Herbicides are expensive, and, unless applied properly and at the correct time, 
they will not provide maximum control of weeds. 
 
Spray equipment should be in good condition, properly calibrated (several times during 
a season) and should have vigorous agitation capability (especially important for 
wettable powders). Herbicides also should be accurately measured or weighed.

Herbicides to control weeds are essential to prevent weed competition and losses in 
sugarcane production. Sugarcane is most susceptible to weed competition during the 
first eight to 10 weeks after cane emergence. Unless herbicides are applied 
immediately after planting, weed seed present in the soil following a fallow program will 
germinate, producing viable seeds and/or rhizomes. 
 
As a result weeds can quickly re-infest a field, with the benefits of weed control in the 
fallow period rapidly lost. 
Selection of pre-emergence herbicides should be based on soil texture and organic 
matter content, weed problem and the variety of sugarcane. For best results, apply 
pre-emergence herbicides im mediately after planting 
 
Recommendations for use of herbicides for weed control in sugarcane are summarized 
in the table below: 
 
Table 9. Pre and Post-Emergence Herbicides For Weed Control in Sugarcane 
 
Dosage (kg/ha) based on clay% 
S.No. 
Herbicide 
Control 
(weeks)
&lt; 20% 
21 - 30% 
&gt;30% 
Pre-Emergence 

Atrazine 50 FW 
6- 8 

Ametryn 80 WP 
6- 8 

Diuron 80 WP 
5-7 

Metribuzin 70 WP 
10-12 

Alachlor 48 EC 
6- 8 
4.0 

Trifluralin 48 EC 
5- 7 

Pendimethalin 50 EC 
8-10 

Terbacil 
1.0 
1.2 

Diuron + 2, 4-D 
1.2 + 1.8 
1.2 + 1.8 
1.2 + 1.8 

Atrazine + Dalapan 
1.25 + 2.5 
1.25 + 2.5 
1.25 + 2.5 
Post - Emergence 

2, 4-D Sodium salt 80 WSP 
5-6 
1.0 
1.2 

Paraquat 
4.0 

Glyphosate 41 WSC 

1.2 

MAMA 
 
 
 
 
 
Irrigation Water Management 
Sugarcane being a long duration crop producing huge amounts of biomass is classed 
among those plants having a high water requirement and yet it is drought tolerant. It is 
mostly grown as an irrigated crop. The plant crop season being 12-18 months in India, 
13-14 months in Iran, 16 months in Mauritius, 13-19 months in Jamaica, 15 months in 
Queensland (Australia) and 20 - 24 months in Hawaii.

Moisture Extraction Pattern 
Most root biomass for sugarcane is found close to the surface and then declines 
approximately exponentially with depth. Typically, approximately 50% of root biomass 
occurs in the top 20 cm of soil and 85% in the top 60 cm. The percentage of roots in 
the 0-30 cm horizon was 48-68%; from 30 to 60 cm, 16 - 18%; 60 to 90 cm, 3-12%; 90 
to 120cm, 4-7%; 120 to 150 cm, 1-7%; and 150 to 180 cm, 0-4%. Thus the moisture 
extraction pattern from different soil layers follows the root biomass distribution. 
 
Root growth responds strongly to the soil environment, creating plasticity in the form 
and size of the root system. The size and distribution of the root system is strongly 
affected by the distribution and availability of soil water, causing differences in the 
capacity of crops to exploit deeper soil reserves. 
 
 
Root distribution of sugarcane crop raised on loamy soil irrigated at 7, 14 and 21 days 
interval. Roots of a 12-month old plant crop were more deeply distributed under less 
frequent irrigation presumably in response to drying of the surface. Deeper rooting 
reduces the vulnerability of crops to soil water deficits by providing increased capacity 
for uptake of deep reserves of soil water. It also aids in reducing lodging. Hence, drip 
irrigated cane should be scheduled irrigations at less frequency during the initial 2 to 3 
months period to promote deeper rooting. (In the graph above: Distribution of root 
riomass with depth for sugarcane irrigated at frequencies of 7 days, 14 days and 21 
days (Baran et. al., 1974) 
 
Nutrient supply has also been shown to similarly affect the rooting patterns. High soil 
strength causes slower root growth with reduced branching and thickened roots. High 
water markedly affects root distribution, with a majority of studies showing that rooting 
ceases within approximately 0.1 m of static water tables. 
 
Restricted root growth above shallow water tables does not necessarily reduce crop 
growth, as capillary rise can supply the crop with water and instances of water uptake 
from within the saturated zone have been observed.

A risk of water stress does result from the lack of root penetration in soils with high 
water tables if ground water height falls rapidly, leaving the root system restricted to 
dry soil. 
 
Physiological Characteristics to be Considered for Efficient Water Managment 
A liberal water supply reduces the cane yield and/or sugar yield, while mild 
water stress enhances the yield 
Excessive watering at tillering should be avoided since it coincides with active 
root development and hinders nutrient uptake due to poor O2 diffusion 
Length of the cane determines the sink available for sugar storage since there is 
no secondary thickening of the stem in sugarcane 
A drying off or cut out period of 4-6 weeks prior to harvest ensures an optimum 
sugar yield 
Reduction of water during the ripeness to flower stage helps to control flowering 
or arrows 
Field Irrigation Schedule 
The goal of an efficient irrigation scheduling programme is to "provide knowledge on 
correct time and optimum quantity of water application to optimize crop yields with 
maximum water use efficiency and at the same time ensure minimum damage to the 
soil". Thus, 
Irrigation scheduling is the decision of when and how much water to apply to a 
cropped field. 
Its purpose is to maximize irrigation efficiencies by applying the exact amount of 
water needed to replenish the soil moisture to the desired level. 
Make efficient use of water and energy. 
Therefore, irrigation scheduling for sugarcane involves precise estimation of depth of 
water to apply at each irrigation, and the interval between irrigation, for each soil-plant-
climatic condition. With drip irrigation, intervals of irrigation are usually daily 
irrespective of the evaporative demand of the atmosphere. 
 
The crop evapotranspiration under standard conditions, denoted as ETc, is the 
evapotranspiration from disease free, well-fertilized sugarcane crop, grown in large 
fields, under optimum soil water conditions, and achieving full production under the 
given climatic condition. The amount of water required to compensate the 
evapotranspiration loss from the cropped field is defined as crop water requirement. 
 
Although the values for crop evapotranspiration and crop water requirement are 
identical, crop water requirement refers to the amount of water that needs to be 
supplied, while crop evapotranspiration refers to the amount of water that is lost in 
evaporation + transpiration.

The irrigation water basically represents the difference between the crop water 
requirement and effective precipitation. The irrigation water requirement also includes 
additional water for leaching of salts and to compensate for non-uniformity of water 
application. 
 
Adequate soil moisture throughout the crop-growing season is important for obtaining 
maximum yields because vegetative growth including cane growth is directly 
proportional to the water transpired. Depending on the agro-ecological conditions, 
cultivation practices adopted and crop cycle (12-24 months) seasonal water 
requirements of sugarcane are about 1300mm to 2500mm distributed throughout the 
growing season (Table 10). The amounts of water required to produce 1.0-kg cane, dry 
matter and sugar are 50 - 60, 135-150 and 1000-2000g, respectively. The transpiration 
coefficient of sugarcane is around 400. This means 400 m3 of water is required to 
produce one ton of dry matter. 
 
Table 10. Sugarcane Water Requirements in Various Countries 
 
S.No. 
Country 
Water requirement (mm) 
1. 
Australia 
1522 (Drip) 
2. 
Burundi, Central Africa 
1327 to 2017 (Furrow) 
3. 
Cuba 
1681 to 2133 (Plant) 
4. 
Hawaii 
2000 to 2400 (24 months) 

Jamaica 

Mauritius 
1670 (Drip) 

Philippines 
2451 (Furrow) 

Pongala, South Africa 

Puerto Rico 

South Africa 

Subtropical India 
1800 (Furrow) 

Taiwan 
1500 to 2200 (Furrow) 

Tropical India 
2000 to 2400 (Furrow) 

Venezuela 
2420 (Furrow) 

Thailand 
2600 (Furrow) 
Source: Several 
 
The Calculation Procedure for Crop Evapotranspiration, ETc, Consists of: 
 
Calculation of Reference Crop Evapotranspiration (ETo) 
Collect available climatic data; based on meteorological data available, select 
prediction method viz., either Penman-Monteith or Pan evaporation method to

calculate ETo. Compute for necessary periods considering the growth subperiods of 
the crop in question. 
 
Construction of Crop Coefficient (Kc) Curve 
Determine time of planting, identify the crop growth subperiods, determining their 
lengths; Select Kc for a given crop growth sub-period under prevailing climatic 
conditions. Construct the crop coefficient curve (allowing one to determine Kc values 
for any period during the growing period); and 
 
 
Calculation of ETc under standard conditions as a product of ETo and Kc. 
 
The reference crop evapotranspiration (ETo) estimated based on Penman-Monteith or 
Adjusted USWB Class A Pan evaporation method reflects the evaporative demand of 
the atmosphere for the location in question. 
 
 
 
In the picture: USWB Class a Pan Evaporimeter for Estimating ETo 
 
While the crop factor (a dimensionless ratio) reflects the crop characteristics and 
indicates the combined loss of water from a sugarcane field both by transpiration and 
soil evaporation (Crop ETc) relative to ETo over the same period. 
 
Several workers have worked out estimates of crop factors experimentally for different 
crop growth stages of sugarcane. The daily requirement in millimeters is converted to 
the equivalent volumetric quantity for the area under drip (1 mm = 10 m3/ha). 
 
A field irrigation schedule prepared based on above approach for irrigating sugarcane 
grown in Tropical region of India is presented in the picture for field application.

While the water requirement during different crop-growth subperiods and cumulative 
ETc is depicted in the picture here. Such type of irrigation scheduling programmes can 
be prepared for each location (depending up on the climatic data availability) in real 
time operation. 
 
 
Water Supply and Cane Yield 
Frequency and depth of irrigation should vary with growth periods of the cane. The 
relationship 
between 
relative 
yield 
decrease 
(1 
- 
Ya/Ym) 
and 
relative 
evapotranspiration deficit for the individual growth sub-periods is shown in the picture. 
During the initial germination, field emergence and establishment of young seedlings 
the crop requires less water, hence light and frequent irrigation water applications are 
preferred.

The water supply must be just sufficient to keep the soil moist with adequate aeration. 
If the soil is allowed due to infrequent and less water application, the germinating buds 
get desiccated leading to a lower and delayed germination. 
 
 
On the other hand over irrigation leads to bud rotting due to lack of aeration, fungal 
attack and soil reducing soil temperature. Thus both under and over irrigation are 
detrimental for germination, resulting in low stalk population per unit area. 
 
During the early vegetative period (formative) the tillering is in direct proportion to the 
water application. An early flush of tillers is ideal because this furnishes shoots of 
approximately same age. Any water shortage during tillering phase would reduce tiller 
production; increase tiller mortality and ultimately the stalk population-an important 
yield component.

However, excess irrigation during tillering phase is harmful particularly in heavy soils, 
since it coincides with active root development, which may be hampered by anaerobic 
condition created in the soil as a result of over irrigation. 
 
The yield formation or grand growth period is the most critical period for moisture 
supply in sugarcane. This is because the actual cane yield build-up or stalk growth 
takes place in this period. The production and elongation of inter-nodes, leaf 
production on the stalk and its expansion, girth improvement, ultimately the stalk 
weight takes place in this period. It is also the period for production of sugar storage 
tissues. Therefore, crop reaches its peak water requirement in this stage. With 
adequate water supply to maintain a sheath moisture content of 84-85% in the leaf 
sheaths, 3,4,5 and 6 from the top during this period of active growth produces longest 
inter-nodes with more girth (thick cane) and the total cane weight is greater. 
 
On the other hand water deficits in yield formation period reduce stalk elongation rate 
due to shortening of inter-nodes resulting in less cane weight and the effect is well 
marked on yield at harvest. A severe water deficit during the later part of the grand 
growth period forces the crop to ripen. In many an areas in India the tillering/early yield 
formation period coincides with hot weather period (March - June). 
 
The evaporative demand of the atmosphere is very high during hot weather period vis-
Ã -vis the crop water needs. Therefore management of available water supplies to 
meet the peak water requirement is very crucial to realize optimum yield potential. 
 
In ripening period the a restricted water supply or mild water deficits (sheath moisture 
content of 74-76%) is necessary to bring the crop to maturity by reducing the rate of 
vegetative growth, dehydrating the cane and forcing the conversion of total sugars to 
recoverable sucrose. With the check of vegetative growth, the ratio between dry matter 
stored as sucrose and that used for new growth increases. 
 
On the other hand plentiful supply of water leads continued vegetative growth thus 
affecting sugar accumulation process. However, when the plant is too seriously 
deprived of water, it would disrupt the plant metabolism and loss of sugar content can 
be greater than sugar formation. An important consideration is that soil should not be 
allowed to crack, as it would cause root pruning and damage the root system. 
 
When the crop is in the ripening period, a farmer may also have a just planted crop on 
his farm in most situations. Therefore, the tendency of the farmer will be to provide 
sufficient water to the new (young) crop and neglect the grown up crop that is to be 
harvested. This situation is particularly true under limited water availability situations. If 
the grown up crop is not irrigated as required it experiences severe water deficits and 
there could be cane breakage, pith formation, significant reduction in cane weight, 
increase in fibre content and deterioration in juice quality.

The situation is further aggravated if the harvesting is delayed. Thus both the farmer 
and the factory would suffer. Therefore, even for the grown up crop, reasonable 
amount of water with restricted supply is necessary to obtain good cane yield. 
 
Sheath Moisture Content 
The sheath moisture or relative water content determined by crop logging technique is 
presented in Fig. It has long been used to control water application to commercial 
sugarcane crop, more particularly during ripening phase, when gradual increase in 
water stress is used to stimulate sugar storage in the stem. 
 
A ripening log is used to compare measured and desired sheath water content during 
approximately 12 to 24 weeks (depending upon the crop duration) prior to harvest. 
 
Sheath water content is measured on a periodic basis, and irrigation intervals and 
amounts are varied to produce a gradual decline of sheath water content, from about 
83% at the beginning of ripening to about 75% at harvest. 
 
 
 
In the graphs / pictures above: 
• 
Cane yield response to water deficits (Doorenbos and Kassam, 1979 ) 
• 
Optimum Sheath Moisture content indices for sugarcane (Lakshmikantham, 
1983) 
• 
Cane Yield Response to seasonal evapotranspiration [Thompson (1976) & 
Jones (1980)] 
 
In Hawaii and Taiwan sheath water content has been found to be a good indicator of 
stem sugar content. Similar methods involving other tissues are in use in Mexico, 
South Africa, India and Zimbabwe.

Irrigation water is often limited and costly input. Therefore determination of optimum 
amount of water over a crop period to achieve higher water use efficiency assumes 
significance. 
 
Several experiments conducted world over have indicated that the relationship 
between cane yield and seasonal crop water use under a given climatic condition was 
linear. 
 
When irrigation plus rainfall is greater than the crop water requirement, anaerobic soil 
conditions or N losses may reduce crop growth rates and cane yield. 
 
Fertigation 
 
Sugarcane being a giant crop producing huge quantity of biomass generally demands 
higher amounts of nutrient elements. A large number of research experiments have 
clearly demonstrated that for producing higher cane and sugar yields on a sustainable 
basis application of adequate amounts of fertilizer nutrients viz., N, P and K is 
essential. 
 
At the same time the cost of chemical fertilizers have increased and there is a need to 
improve fertilizer use efficiency for more benefits. The best answer to this challenge is 
"Fertigation", where both water and fertilizers are delivered to crop simultaneously 
through a drip irrigation system. Fertigation ensures that essential nutrients are 
supplied precisely at the area of most intensive root activity according to the specific 
requirements of sugarcane crop and type of soil resulting in higher cane yields and 
sugar recovery. 
 
Fertigation Offers Several Distinct Advantages in Comparison to Conventional 
Application Methods: 
Distribution of plant nutrients more evenly throughout the wetted root zone 
resulting in increased nutrient availability & uptake contributing to higher crop 
growth rates and cane yields 
Supply of nutrients incrementally according to the crop developmental phases 
throughout the season to meet the actual nutritional requirements of the crop 
Careful regulation and monitoring the supply of nutrients 
Application of nutrients to the soil when crop or soil conditions would otherwise 
prohibit entry into the field with conventional equipment 
Minimal nutrient losses through consumption by weeds, leaching and runoff 
No damage to the crop by root pruning, breakage of leaves, or bending of 
leaves, as occurs with conventional fertilizer application methods/equipment 
Less energy is expended in application of the fertilizer

Usually less labour & equipment are required for application of the fertilizer and 
to supervise the application 
Soil compaction is avoided because heavy equipment never enters the field 
No salt injury to foliage 
Allows raising of crop on marginal lands, where accurate control of water and 
nutrient ion in the plant's root environment is critical 
Nutrient Uptake by Sugarcane 
 
 
 Absorption of macronutrients by the variety CB41 - 76 (Malavolta, 1982) 
 
Fig. shows the accumulation of macronutrients by the variety CB 41-76 under Brazilian 
conditions. Several works have indicated that there is a close relationship between 
increase in stalk production and accumulation of N and K, which suggests that these 
two elements "go together" in the nutrition and fertilization of the sugarcane plant. The 
maximum rate of uptake of macronutrients by plant cane and first ratoon in the period 
of higher growth rate is given in 
Table 11.

Table 11. Maximum Rate of Uptake of Nutrients by Plant Cane and Ratoon Cane 
(Malavolta, 1994) 
 
Element 
Plant cane 
Firfst ratoon 
 
kg ha-1 day-1 
Nitrogen 
0.59 
0.73 
Phosphorus 
0.08 
0.11 
Potassium 
0.71 
0.95 
Calcium 
0.45 
0.33 
Magnesium 
0.24 
0.26 
Sulphur 
0.16 
0.31 
 
Generally speaking, the content of the macro and micronutrients in the plant obeys the 
following decreasing order: 
 
K»gt; N»gt; P»gt;Ca»gt;S»gt;Mg»gt;Cl»gt;Fe»gt;Zn»gt;Mn»gt;Cu»gt;B»gt;Mo 
 
Further most of the published data on the mineral requirements of sugarcane refer only 
to the above ground parts, which are stalks and leaves. Table 12 is an attempt to show 
the quantities of macro and micronutrients contained in the entire plant cane. 
 
Table 12. Quantity of Macro and Micronutrients in the Below Ground and Aerial 
Parts of Plant Cane 
Roots 
Millable stalks 
Leaves 
Total 
Element 
Kg/ha 
Nitrogen 

Phosphorus 

Potassium 

Calcium 

Magnesium 

Sulphur 

Chlorides 

Silicon 

g/ha 
Boron 

Copper 

Iron 

16600 
Mangnese 

Molybodynum 

Zinc 

Catani et al. (1959), Orlando Filho (1978), Haag et al. (1987), 
Sampaio et al. (1987), Korndorfer (1989)

Role of Nutrients 
 
Nitrogen 
1. N constitutes only a fraction of 1.0% of the total dry weight of mature cane 
2. Key element influencing growth, yield & quality 
3. Adequate and timely supply promotes - Tillering, Canopy development, Stalk 
formation & stalk growth [internode formation, elongation, increase in girth & 
weight 
4. Root penetration and proliferation 
5. Deficiency of N causes chlorosis, early leaf senescence, thinner & shorter stalk 
and longer and thinner roots 
6. Excess N prolongs vegetative growth, delays maturity and ripening; increases 
reducing sugar content in juice and thus lowering juice purity, and increases 
soluble N in juice affecting clarification; makes crop susceptible to lodging and 
pest and disease attack 
 
Phosphorus 
1. Requirement is relatively less than N and K 
2. Vital for plant metabolism and photosynthesis 
3. Essential for cell division and thus indispensable for crop growth & development 
4. Promotes tillering, canopy and stalk development 
5. Promotes root penetration and proliferation 
6. Adequate P [ 3-4mg/liter ] in cane juice is necessary for proper clarification 
7. Phosphorus deficiency causes - Poor tillering & reduction in internodal length, 
Delay in canopy closure and Reduction root surface area 
 
Potassium 
1. Required for several plant activities - Photosynthesis, carbon assimilation & 
translocation of carbohydrates 
2. Promotes sugar synthesis & its translocation to storage tissue 
3. Imparts resistance against pests & disease attack and lodging 
4. Regulates stomatal opening & closing and thus maintains turgor pressure under 
unfavourable soil moisture conditions 
5. Luxury consumption adversely affects the crystallization of sugar & higher sugar 
losses in molasses 
6. Deficiency of K affects growth by reducing internodal length, sugar synthesis 
and recovery

Causes of Nutrient Deficiency Symptoms 
When a given nutrient is not present in the soil solution in a concentration sufficient for 
normal growth and differentiation, visual symptoms of malnutrition may eventually 
show up. The shortage of nutrients, which translate into symptoms of deficiency, could 
be due to several causes as shown in Table 13. It is clear that the three chief causes 
are low reserves to begin with, as it is the case of old weathered soils in the tropical 
regions, decrease in availability, and absence or lack of the element in the fertilizer 
programme at the rates it is applied. 
 
Table 13. Main Causes of Deficiency Symptoms in the Sugarcane Plant 
Element 
Cause 
Any 
Low soil reserve 
Absence or inadequate quantity in the fertilization or liming 
programme 
Nitrogen 
Low organic matter content 
High acidity (lack of mineralization) 
High rainfall (leaching) 
Phosphorus 
High acidity and high sexquiooxides (fixation) 
Excess liming (lower availability) 
Potassium 
Excess liming (competition for uptake) 
High rainfall (sandy soils, leaching) 
Calcium 
& 
Magnesium 
Excess K in the fertilizer programme (competition) 
Sulphur 
See nitrogen 
Use of "concentrated" fertilizers 
Boron 
See nitrogen 
Excess nitrogen ("dilution" or inhibition in uptake) 
Copper 
Excess P in the fertilization programme(inhibition in 
uptake) 
Iron 
High organic matter and moisture (loweravailability) 
Manganese 
High organic matter, Excess liming (loss in availability) 
Molybdenum 
High acidity (lower availability) 
Excess sulphate (inhibition in uptake) 
Zinc 
High P in fertilizer programme (inhibition uptake) 
Source: Malavolta (1994) 
 
Fertilizer recommendations in different states 
Sugarcane being a heavy feeder requires very large quantities of nutrients for growth 
and yield, accounting for 20 to 25% of the total cost of the production. The fertilizer 
recommendations for sugarcane in different countries are given in Table 14.

Table 14. Sugarcane: Recommended Nutrient Doses in Different Countries 
NNuuutttrrriiieeennntttsss (((kkkggg///hhhaaa))) 
CCooouuunnntttrrryyy 
CCrrroooppp 
NN 
PP2
OO5

K
KK2
22000 
RReeem
mmaaarrrkkksss 
AArrrgggeeennntttiiinnnaaa 
111000000 
AAdddaaapppttt tttooo rrreeeqqquuuiiirrreeem
mmeeennnttt 
AAuuussstttrrraaallliiiaaa 
555666 
777888 
222555---888000 
777555---111555000 
IIInnn aaaddddddiiitttiiiooonnn tttooo B
BBuuurrreeeaaauuu 
m
mmiiixxxtttuuurrreee 
B
BBaaannnggglllaaadddeeessshhh 
888555 
111111000 
B
BBrrraaazzziiilll 
NNooorrrttthhh E
EEaaasssttt 
SSooouuuttthhh E
EEaaasssttt 
CCeeennntttrrraaalll W
W
Weeesssttt 
SSooouuuttthhh 
666000---888000 
666000---888000 
555000---999000 
555000--- 999000 
333000---444000 
444000--- 666000 
444000---111000000 
222000---444000 
888000--- 111888000 
222000---111000000 
555000---111111000 
222555---555000 
111555---666000 
000---111222000 
222000---666000 
444000---111444000 
222000---111222000 
111000---888000 
222000---999000 
000---666000 
NN --- 222///333 sssiiidddeee---dddrrreeesssssseeeddd 
KK aaaccccccooorrrdddiiinnnggg tttooo sssoooiiilll 
aaannnaaalllyyysssiiisss 
KK aaaccccccooorrrdddiiinnnggg tttooo sssoooiiilll 
aaannnaaalllyyysssiiisss 
AAsss aaabbbooovvveee 
AAsss aaabbbooovvveee 
AAsss aaabbbooovvveee 
B
BBrrriiitttiiissshhh G
GGuuuyyyaaannnaaa ------ 
666555---999000 
555000---111000000 
666000---111555000 
CCooolllooom
mmbbbiiiaaa 
555000---777000 
555000---111000000 
555000---111000000 
666000---111222000 
666000---111555000 
666000---111555000 
NN 
--- S
SSiiidddeee 
dddrrreeesssssseeeddd 
aaaccccccooorrrdddiiinnnggg 
tttooo 
llleeeaaafff 
aaannnaaalllyyysssiiisss 
KK rrraaattteeesss dddeeepppeeennndddiiinnnggg 
uuupppooonnn sssoooiiilll aaannnaaalllyyysssiiisss 
CCooossstttaaa R
RRiiicccaaa 
888000---222000000 
111000000---222555000 
666000---222000000 
555000---222000000 
888000---222000000 
888000---222555000 
CCuuubbbaaa 

333555---111555000 
000---555000 
000---555000 
000---111222000 
000---111555000 
KK rrraaattteeesss dddeeepppeeennndddiiinnnggg 
uuupppooonnn sssoooiiilll aaannnaaalllyyysssiiisss aaannnddd 
yyyiiieeelllddd llleeevvveeelll 
E
EEcccuuuaaadddooorrr 
999000 
777555---111333555 
777555---111999555 
NN---111///333 sssiiidddeee dddrrreeesssssseeeddd 
KK rrraaattteeesss aaaccccccooorrrdddiiinnnggg 
tttooo sssoooiiilll aaannnaaalllyyysssiiisss 
IIInnndddiiiaaa 
SSE
EEE
EE N
NNE
EEX
XXTTT TTTA
AAB
BBLLLE
EE 
IIInnndddooonnneeesssiiiaaa 
KK rrraaattteeesss aaaccccccooorrrdddiiinnnggg 
tttooo sssoooiiilll aaannnaaalllyyysssiiisss 
JJJaaam
mmaaaiiicccaaa 
888000---111666000 
KK rrraaattteeesss aaaccccccooorrrdddiiinnnggg 
tttooo sssoooiiilll aaannnaaalllyyysssiiisss 
M
MMaaauuurrriiitttiiiuuusss 
111000000---111222555 
222 --- 111 ---111 m
mmiiixxxtttuuurrreee 
M
MMeeexxxiiicccooo 
111222000---111888000 
000---111555000 
000---111555000 
M
MMooosssttt fffrrreeeqqquuueeennnttt rrraaattteeesss::: 
NN+++666000 
PP2
OO5
55+++666000 
K
KK2
OO 
PPaaakkkiiissstttaaannn 
999000---111666000 
PPhhhiiillliiippppppiiinnneeesss 
V
VVM
MMC
CC D
DDiiissstttrrriiicccttt 
LLLuuuzzzooonnn 
PPuuueeerrrtttooo R
RRiiicccooo 
111222555 
111222000---111444000 
111333555---222000000 
666222 
111888000 
111111222 
SSooouuuttthhh A
AAfffrrriiicccaaa 
CCoooaaassstttaaalll 
LLLooow
wwlllaaannnddd 
NNaaatttaaalll M
MMiiidddlllaaannnddd 
LLLooow
wwvvveeelllddd 
111000000---111222000 
111444000 
888000 
111000000 
444000 
222000 
666000 
444000 
333000 
111000 
111000000 
111555000 
111222555 
111777555 
111222555 
111777555 
NN aaannnddd K
KK2
OO fffooorrr ppplllaaannnttt 
cccaaannneee 
iiinnn 

ssspppllliiittt 
aaappppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnnsss 
H
HHaaaw
wwaaaiiiiii (((U
UUS
SSA
AA))) 
IIIrrrrrriiigggaaattteeeddd 
RRaaaiiinnnfffeeeddd 
444000000 
333000000 
222888000 
222888000 
444000000---444555000 
444000000---444555000 
NN iiinnn 222 ssspppllliiittt aaappppppllliiicccaaatttiiiooonnnsss

Leaf Analysis 
Leaf analysis may be considered a method, which evaluates the soil supply of 
available elements using the plant itself as an extracting agent. A general 
representation of the relationship between leaf concentration and cane yield is 
presented in fig. 
 
 
Relationship Between Leaf Concentration and Cane Yield 
(Prevot & Ollagnier, 1956) 
 
The picture describes several situations, which may occur. Clockwise the following 
segments are shown: 
Curve in "C" - Yield is increased but leaf level is reduced; this happens when 
the rate of dry matter production is higher than the velocity of uptake or 
transport of the element into the leaf tissue which causes its dilution 
Zone Of Deficiency Or Adjustment - Only in this section is the relationship 
between leaf level and growth or yield is observed, and very often there is a 
linear relationship between increase in leaf concentration and yield; 
Lower Critical Level - Usually a narrow band below which yield is reduced due 
to a shortage of the element 
Zone Of Luxury Consumption - It is wider in the case of macronutrients like K, 
and much shorter in other cases such as that of B; leaf level increases wheras 
production remains constant, there is therefore, a waste of fertility or fertilizer; 
Upper critical level - A zone which separates the yield plateau from the toxicity 
zone; 
Zone of toxicity - Leaf content increases even further and yield drops, either as 
consequence of a toxic effect of the element, or as a result of unbalance among

In the agricultural practice, the goal is not the maximum physical production but rather 
the realization of the maximum economic yield (MEY). For this reason the concept of 
critical level or lower critical level was redefined with the introduction of an economical 
component: it is the range of an element in the leaf below which production is 
restricted and above which fertilizer application is no longer economical. 
 
This means that above this physiological-economical critical level, both yield and leaf 
content of the element could rise in response to the fertilization. The increase in yield, 
however, does not pay the additional fertilizer and the cost of its transport and 
distribution. Thus levels of nutrients considered adequate for economic yield are 
presented in Table 15 & 16. 
 
Table 15. Levels of Macronutrients Considered Adequate for Maximum 
Economic Yield 
% of dry matter 
Country 
Crop 
N 
P 
K 
Ca 
Mg 
S 
1.90-2.50
0.21-0.30
1.30-2.00
0.20-0.60 0.10-0.30 
Australia 
1.90-2.50
0.21-0.30
1.30-2.00
1.90-2.10
0.20-0.24
1.10-1.30
0.80-1.00 0.20-0.30 0.25-0.30
Brazil 
2.00-2.20
0.18-0.20
1.30-1.50
0.50-0.70 0.20-0.25 0.08-0.35
2.1 
0.21-0.35
1.25-2.00
0.15-0.20 0.12-0.18 0.08-0.35
British Guyana 
1.9 
0.21-0.35
1.25-2.00
0.20-0.24 0.12-0.18 
Colombia 
1.80-2.00
0.25-0.35
1.60-1.80
&gt; 0.25 &gt; 0.20 
India 
1.96 
0.086 
1.99 
Puerto Rico 
1.60-2.00
0.18-0.24
1.55-2.00
0.13 
South Africa 
1.70-1.90
0.10-0.20
1.05-1.10
0.15-0.18 
0.08 
0.12-0.13
USA 
1.50-1.75
0.18-0.22
1.25-1.75
0.28-0.47 0.14-0.33 0.13-0.18
Reuter (1986), Malavolta (1986), Evens (1967), Garcia Ocampo (1991), Srivastava (1992), 
Samuels (1971), Gosnell & Long (1971), Anderson & Bowen (1990) 
 
Table 16. Levels of Macronutrients Considered Adequate for 
Maximum Conomic Yield 
% 
Country 
Crop 
B 
Cl 
Cu 
Fe 
Mn 
Mo 
Si 
Zn 
Australia 

9-30 
8-10 200-500 100-250
0.15-
0.30 
25-50
Brazil 
9-30 
8-10 
80-150 50-125
25-30
British 
Guyana 
2-10 
smaller 
than 0.5% 
5-100 
4-15 
20-200 0.08-1.0 
15-50

South Africa 
-- 
1.6-10
 
49-915
3-12 

-- 
12-25
USA 
-- 
3-8 
0.068% 
7-600 
20-21 14-235
0.05-4 1.5-4% 19-38
Anderson & Bowen (1990), Malavolta (1982), Evens (1967), Wood (1987), 
Scroeder et.el (1983), Anderson & Bowen (1990) 
 
Fertigation Programme 
The aim of the fertigation programme is to cover the difference between requirement 
and supply, that is: 
 
(M) Fertilizer = [M (requirement - supply)] f 
 
Wherein M = a macro or micronutrient, f = is a factor higher than 1 destined to 
compensate for losses due to volatilization, leaching, fixation and immobilization. 
 
Whenever the soil supply is lower than the crop requirement, fertilizers have to be 
added in order to increase and to keep M (in soil solution) at a level compatible with 
the plant needs. In order to make practical fertilizer recommendations, we have to 
answer several questions, namely: 
 
What? Which Element(s) is (are) Limiting Growth and Production; How Much? 
What Quantity Has to be Added? 
The capacity of the soil to supply nutrients can be evaluated through leaf analysis 
already dealt with, and more frequently via soil chemical analysis. Further the cation 
exchange capacity, clay content, efficiency factor etc have to be considered to quantify 
the nutrient requirement. 
 
When? In What Stages Fertilization is to be Done? 
As shown in fig. accumulation pattern as a function of crop ontogeny has to be taken in 
to account for timing of fertilizer application. Both nitrogen and potash fertilizers tend to 
increase the osmotic pressure of the soil solution which when too high could damage 
the seed cane or the roots. Nitrogen in mineral forms can be leached from the 
rhizosphere. The same is true for K in the case of soils with low CEC. These facts 
seem to point out the need to apply only part of the N requirement at planting and 
doing the same for potash in sandy soils. 
 
Nitrogen requirement of sugarcane is greatest during the tillering (formative) phase. 
This is required for adequate tiller production and canopy development. Tillering in field 
grown sugarcane commences around 30 to 45 days after planting. Therefore, 
adequate N supply should be made available to the crop in the soil from the start of 
tillering phase. Further, crop requirement for N is higher in early grand growth period.

This facilitates cane formation; checks tiller mortality and promote cane growth. 
Application of more N at later phase of active crop growth period not only promotes 
late tiller formation, but also affects sugar recovery due to reduced juice sucrose (Pol) 
percent, increase in soluble N in juice, water shoot formation besides attracting pests 
and diseases. 
 
Phosphorus need of sugarcane is greater in the formative phase of the crop. Thus, the 
optimum time of P application is during initial stages of crop growth. Therefore, 
sufficient P must be made available in the soil during formative phase for absorption by 
the crop. 
 
Potassium applications are usually done along with N application. This is because of 
better utilization of N by the crop in the presence of K; therefore, potassium should be 
applied along with N. However, late application of K at around six months has also 
been found to improve sugar recovery. 
 
In general all the phosphorus should be applied before 4 months, nitrogen before 6 
months and potassium before 7 months period. Relative requirement of NPK (%) at 
different crop growth stages is shown in Fig. 
 
 
Relative requirement of NPK at different crop growth stages of sugarcane 
(Bachchhav, 2005) 
 
How? What is the Most Efficient Way of Fertilization? 
The efficacy of fertilizer depends on several factors, such as: process of contact 
between the element and the root, distribution of the root system, type of crop (plant 
crop or ratoon) and spacing, type of fertilizer and application rate. Root interception, 
mass flow and diffusion make the following percent contributions to the total of the 
element, which reaches the root surface: N (1, 99 & 0), P (2, 4 & 94); K (2, 20 & 78).

While in the case of nitrogen mass flow plays an almost exclusive role for the contact, 
diffusion is the chief mechanism (94%) for P and for K (78%). It follows therefore that 
as long as P is placed adequately, both N and K will be taken equally well. Thus from 
the above it appears that fertigation is the best option of fertilization. 
 
With what? Which fertilizers are to be Used? 
Table 17 lists the main water soluble fertilizers used in the sugarcane world. It is 
desirable to use water soluble specialty fertilizers in view of the following features: 
 
Table 17. Fertilizers Suitable for Fertigation Via Drip Irrigation System 
 
Nutrient 
Water soluble fertilizers 
Nutrient 
content 
Nitrogen 
Urea 
Ammonium Nitrate 
Ammonium Sulphate 
Calcium Nitrate 
Magnesium Nitrate 
Urea Ammonium Nitrate 
Potassium Nitrate 
Monoammonium Phosphate 
46-0-0 
34-0-0 
21-0-0 
16-0-0 
11-0-0 
32-0-0 
13-0-46 
32-0-0 
Phosphorus 
Monoammonium Phosphate 
Monopotassium Phosphate 
Phosphoric Acid 
12-61-0 
0-54-32 
0-82-0 
Potassium 
Potassium Chloride 
Potassium Sulphate 
Potassium Nitrate 
Potassium Thiosulphate 
Monopotassium Phosphate 
0-0-60 
0-0-50 
13-0-46 
0-0-25 
0-52-34 
NPK 
Polyfeed 
19-19-19 
20-20-20 
Micronutrients 
Fe EDTA 
Fe DTPA 
Fe EDDHA 
Zn EDTA 
Ca EDTA 
Rexolin CXK (B+Cu+Fe+Mn+Mo+Zn+Mg) 

9.7 
--- 
Free from chlorides and sodium 
No salt build up in the crop root zone 
Contain 100% plant nutrients 
Fast acting nitrate nitrogen, soluble phosphorus and soluble postassium

Completely water soluble with any residues 
Most of the fertilizers are acidic in nature, hence no special chemical treatment 
is required to check emitter plugging 
Maintain optimum soil pH contributing to more uptake of nutrients 
Most of the fertilizers are blended with micronutrients 
Effect on Quality? Not Only Total Tonnage of Millable Stalks are to be 
Considered, the Effect of the Fertilizer on Sugar Yield Has Also to be Taken into 
Account: 
It is well known that "sugar is made in the field, not in the factory". Sugar formation and 
accumulation is a function of several variables viz., variety and age or duration of the 
crop cycle, climatic conditions, soil fertility and fertilization. The effect of fertilization of 
course reflects to a large extent the role played by the nutrient in the physiological 
process within the plant, particularly photosynthesis, transport and accumulation of 
sucrose (the sink source relationship). 
 
Increase in the rate of N raises yields of stalk and sugar until yield reaches a 
maximum. If N is applied in excess of the optimum, sugar production may drop. Timing 
of N application has a profound influence on sucrose content at harvest. N application 
at beginning of vegetative growth has no negative effect on sucrose content. However, 
late application at 10 months caused a decrease in sugar yield of 14 g per stalk when 
compared to the application before 7 months. 
 
Higher rates of P (100 kg P2O5/ha) application can reduce yield, sugar concentration, 
pol % and purity, particularly in ratoons and in soils not deficient in phosphorus. On the 
other hand, in P deficient soils higher p levels increase pol % and purity. The amount 
of P in cane juice has an effect on clarification and should be in the range of 132 to 
264 ppm P when lime is used for clarification. Other methods of clarification may need 
lower values. 
 
Potassium application raises millable stalk yield, sugar % of cane and in brix % juice 
also. K deficiency impairs sucrose transport from the leaf into the stalk (Fig.). There is 
a positive interaction between N and K - the reduction in sugar content caused by high 
rates of N is ameliorated by an adequate supply of K. Excessive dosages of K i.e., 
over and above optimal rates may exert a negative effect on apparent sucrose percent 
in cane (pol % cane) and may promote an increase in the ash content of juice. 
Increased ash content in cane juice has a negative influence on sugar quality since K 
is the main constituent of juice ashes. 
 
When k exceeds 1000 ppm in juice it is undesirable and affects manufacturing 
process. Potassium passes through the clarification process affecting the exhaustion 
of the final syrup, keeping a certain amount of sucrose in solution. K is a mellassigenic 
substance because one mol of K holds one molecule of sucrose. The unfavourable

effects of K however, should be anticipated only when excessive rates are used; in low 
potassium soils improvement in cane quality are to be expected, as shown in Fig. 
 
 
Effect of K Supply on Sucrose Yield, Sucrose and Fibre Content 
(Malavolta, 1994) 
 
Considering the above factors a model fertigation progremme is given in Table 18 for 
12 months crop and Table 19 for 14-16 months crops. This is only a guideline, based 
on the local soil, variety, climatic and management factors necessary adjustments can 
be made to the programme. 
 
Table 18. Fertigation Schedule for Seasonal (12 months)/Ratoon Sugarcane 
Nutrients (kg/ha/day) 
Days After Planting 
N 
P2O5 
K2O 
1-30 Days 
1.20 
0.10 
0.20 
31-80 Days 
1.50 
0.40 
0.24 
81-110 Days 
2.00 
1.00 
0.40 
111-150 Days 
0.75 
0.30 
0.75 
151-190 Days 
-- 
 
1.50 
 
Table 19. Fertigation Schedule for Preseasonal (14 to 16 months) Sugarcane 
Nutrients (kg/ha/day) 
Days After Planting 
N 
P2O5 
K2O 
1-30 Days 
1.5 
0.15 
0.25 
31-80 Days 
2.0 
0.60 
0.30 
81-110 Days 
2.5 
1.50 
0.50 
111-150 Days 
0.75 
0.50 
1.0 
151-190 Days 
-- 
 
1.80

Earthing Up 
 
Earthing-up operation is also known as 
"hilling-up". This operation is carried out in 
two or three stages.The first earthing-up 
operation is known partial earthing-up and 
the second/third operation is known as "full 
earthing-up". 
 
The partial earthing-up is done at 45 days 
after planting. In partial earthing-up, little 
amount of soil from either side of the 
furrow is taken and placed around the base 
of the shoots. While doing partial earthing-
up, the furrow in which the cane row is 
present gets partially filled-up. 
 
Full earthing-up is done after 120 days 
after planting coinciding with the peak tiller 
population stage. During full earthing-up 
the soil from the ridge in between is fully 
removed and placed near the cane on either side. This operation converts the furrows 
into ridges and ridges into furrows.This operation could be done either manually or by 
using a bullock-drawn/tractor drawn furrower depending upon the spacing adopted. (In 
the picture: Earthing up or hilling up by machinery) 
 
Full earthing-up at the end of formative phase (i.e., 120 DAP) checks further tillering, 
provides sufficient soil volume for root proliferation, promotes better soil aeration and 
provides a sound anchorage or support to the crop and thus preventing lodging. 
 
One more earthing-up after cane population is stabilized at 180 DAP may be helpful in 
preventing lodging and water shoots formation. It also improves aeration and helps to 
control weeds. 
 
Detrashing 
 
Detrashing refers to removal of unwanted bottom dry and green leaves at regular 
intervals. Sugarcane stalk bears large number of leaves (30-35) equal to the number of 
inter-nodes under good management systems. 
 
However, all these leaves are not productive, only top eight to ten leaves are required 
for optimum photosynthesis. In fact the bottom green leaves are parasitic on the upper 
productive leaves and drain out the food reserves (photosynthates) which other wise

could be used for stalk growth. Therefore, in sugarcane it is important to remove the 
lower dry and green leaves. 
 
 
In the picture: Detrashing in sugarcane is beneficial in many ways 
 
Detrashing should be taken up after the cane formation around 150 days after planting. 
There after it could be done at bi-monthly interval depending up on the labour 
availability. 
 
Detrashing helps in: 
 
Maintaining clean field 
Enhances air movement and enriches Co² with in the crop canopy providing an 
ideal micro-climate for unrestricted growth of cane 
More food material is made available for stalk growth 
Reduces the problem of infestation of several insect-pests like scales, mealy 
bug, white flies etc 
Reduces bud sprouting due to accumulation of water inside the sheath in some 
varieties. 
Bud sprouting is not desirable as it would reduce main stalk growth and affect 
sugar accumulation 
Facilitates easy entry and movement in the field, particularly to inspect the 
condition of the crop and drip laterals and thus accordingly plan the fertigation 
and plant protection schedules 
A clean field minimizes rodents, rats, squirrels in the field which may otherwise 
cause damage to the crop 
Facilitates easy and economy in harvesting besides clean canes for crushing 
Detrashed trash can be used as a mulch for moisture conservation

Clean leaves can be used for composting 
 
Propping 
 
The operation of tying the leaves together using the bottom dry and green leaves is 
known as propping. It is primarily done to check lodging of cane. Usually the trash 
without removing from the cane is twisted to form a sort of rope and cane stalks are 
tied together. This is known as trash-twist propping. Propping can be either done for 
each row or two rows can be brought together and tied. 
 
In India bamboo poles are used and propping is done in certain pockets, but it is too 
expensive. In areas where cane top growth is heavy and wind velocities are high, 
propping is very much necessary to prevent lodging. This is because lodging leads to 
several problems: 
Cane breakage and thus loss of stalk number at harvest and thus loss of cane 
yield 
Infestation of certain pests and diseases causing microbes through lodged and 
damaged canes 
Damage by rats and rodents 
Bud sprouting leading to reduced cane quality 
Aerial root formation which also affects cane quality 
Difficulty in inspection of driplines and harvesting 
 
 
In the Picture: Propping in sugarcane prevents lodging and minimizes pests

Removal of Water Shoots 
 
Water shoots are the late-formed tillers or side shoots, which are robust and fast 
growing. They originate mainly due to plentiful supply of water, inadequate earthing-up 
and late fertigation. These water shoots, as the name indicates, contain lot of water 
and less sucrose and more of reducing sugars. 
 
Water shoots affects the growth of adjacent stalks. They harbour insect-pests and 
when they are harvested and sent to mill for crushing, lead to reduced juice quality and 
affect sugar recoveries. Therefore it is advisable to remove water shoots as and when 
they arise. The water shoots can be used as cattle feed. 
 
Harvesting Management 
 
Harvesting of sugarcane at a proper time i.e., peak maturity, by adopting right 
technique is necessary to realize maximum weight of the millable canes (thus sugar) 
produced with least possible field losses under the given growing environment. 
 
On the other hand harvesting either under-aged or over-aged cane with improper 
method of harvesting leads to loss in cane yield, sugar recovery, poor juice quality and 
problems in milling due to extraneous matter. 
 
Therefore, proper harvesting should ensure: 
 
To harvest the cane at peak maturity (i.e., avoiding cutting of either over-
matured or under-matured cane) 
Cutting cane to ground level so that the bottom sugar rich internodes are 
harvested which add to yield and sugar 
De-topping at appropriate height so that the top immature internodes are 
eliminated 
Proper cleaning of the cane i.e., removing the extraneous matter such as 
leaves, trash, roots etc. 
Quick disposal of the harvested cane to factory 
Several standard analytical methods are available to determine the peak maturity or 
quality so that the cane is harvested at right time. Without such analysis also several 
farmers take-up cane harvesting based on crop age and appearance. Sometimes 
farmers harvest the crop even before the crop fully matures due to necessity to supply 
cane to the mills early. 
 
Likewise delays in harvesting are also quite common, particularly when there is excess 
cane area. To avoid such extremes harvesting should be done at right time employing

right method. The following criteria enable harvesting of cane at right time adopting 
proper procedures: 
 
Crop Age 
Harvesting is done based on maturity (age) group. Farmers who grow a particular 
variety are usually conversant with the harvesting time. Even most sugar factories give 
cutting orders to farmers based on crop age. This is not a scientific method since, 
planting time, crop management practices, weather conditions etc influences maturity. 
 
Visual Symptoms 
Yellowing and drying of leaves, metallic sound of mature canes when tapped, 
appearance of sugar crystal glistening when a mature cane is cut in a slanting way and 
held against the sun are some of the visual indices of assessing maturity of cane. 
 
Quality Parameters 
Important sugarcane quality parameters for assessing cane maturity are the juice Brix, 
pol or sucrose percentage and purity. 
• 
Juice Brix: Juice Brix refers to the total solids content present in the juice 
expressed in percentage. Brix includes sugars as well as non-sugars. Brix can 
be measured in the field itself in the standing cane crop using a Hand 
Refractometer. This is usually referred as a Hand Refractometer Brix or HR 
Brix. In the field using a pierce collect composite juice samples from several 
canes. Then place a drop of the composite juice sample in the Hand 
Refractometer 
and 
measure 
the 
Brix 
reading. 
The circular field gets darkened relative to the Brix level, which could be easily 
read. The HR Brix meter has graduations from 0 to 32 per cent. The HR Brix 
readings can be separately taken from both top and bottom. A narrow range 
indicates ripeness of the cane, while a wide difference indicates that the cane is 
yet too ripe. On the other-hand if the bottom portion of the cane has lower Brix 
value than the top, it means that the cane is over-ripened and reversion of sugar 
is taking place. 
• 
Juice Sucrose Or Pol Per Cent: The juice sucrose per cent is the actual cane 
sugar present in the juice. It is determined by using a polarimeter, hence 
sucrose per cent is also referred to as pol per cent. For all practical purposes 
pol % and sucrose % are synonyms. Now a days an instrument called 
sucrolyser is also available for determining sucrose % in juice. 
• 
Purity Coefficient: It refers to the percentage of sucrose present in the total 
solids content in the juice. A higher purity indicates the presence of higher 
sucrose content out of the total solids present in juice. The purity percentage 
along with sucrose percent aids in determining maturity time.

Purity Percentage = (Sucrose %/HR Brix)100 
 A cane crop is considered fit for harvesting if it has attained a minimum of 
16% sucrose and 85% purity. 
• 
Reducing Sugars: The reducing sugars refer to the percentage of other 
sugars (fructose and glucose) in the juice. A lower reducing sugars value 
indicates that much of the sugars have been converted into sucrose. 
• 
Commercial Cane Sugar: The commercial cane sugar (CCS) refers to the total 
recoverable sugar percent in the cane. This could be calculated by the following 
formula: 
CCS (tons/ha) = [Yield (tons/ha) x Sugar Recovery (%)] /100 
Sugar Recovery (%) = [S - 0.4 (B - S)] x 0.73 
Where, S= Sucrose % in juice and B= Corrected Brix (%) 
 
Manual Harvesting 
 
In many countries even today harvesting is done 
manually using various types of hand knives or hand 
axes.Among the several tools the cutting blade is 
usually heavier and facilitates easier and efficient 
cutting of cane. 
 
Manual harvesting requires skilled labourers as 
improper harvest of cane leads to loss of cane & sugar 
yield, poor juice quality and problems in milling due to 
extraneous matter. 
 
(In the picture: Manual harvesting of sugarcane) 
 
 
 
Mechanical Harvesting 
Harvesting labour is becoming scarce and 
costly in view of diversion of labour to other 
remunerative work in industry, construction, 
business etc. Mill stoppages because of non-
availability of canes are not uncommon owing 
to shortage of harvesting labour. And, most of 
the new mills are of higher crushing capacity 
and many are expanding their crushing 
capacities. Therefore daily requirement of 
cane is increasing and hence greater 
demand for harvesting labour.

Added to this most of the present day agricultural labourers are not interested in field 
operations involving much drudgery. Thus in years to come, the labour position is likely 
to deteriorate further. Therefore mechanization is inevitable and hence, adoption of 
mechanical 
harvesting 
of 
cane 
in 
future 
is 
inevitable. 
(In 
the 
picture: 
Mechanical harvesting of sugarcane) 
 
In countries like Australia, Brazil, USA, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand etc where 
sugarcane cultivation is highly mechanized huge harvesters are employed for cane 
harvesting. In these countries, sugarcane is grown on large plantation scale in large 
farms owned by either mills or big farmers. The field capacity of mechanical cane 
harvesters varies with the size (2.5 to 4 ha per day of 8 hours. 
 
The limitation of mechanical harvesters is use of such machines in small, irregular and 
fragmented holdings, diversified cropping patterns, limited resource capacity of small & 
marginal farmers in several countries. 
 
Yield 
 
Sugar yield depends on cane tonnage, sugar content of the cane and on the cane 
quality. It is important that the cane is harvested at the most suitable time when the 
economic optimum of recoverable sugar per area is reached. 
 
Cane tonnage at harvest with best management practices under drip ferti-irrigation can 
vary between 150 and 175 ton/ha in sub-tropical zone and between 150 to 300 
tons/ha, which depends particularly on the length of the total growing period and 
whether it is a plant or a ratoon crop. The water utilization efficiency for harvested cane 
yield containing about 80 percent moisture is around 15 to 20 kg/m3 
 
Toward maturity, vegetative growth is reduced and sugar content of the cane 
increases greatly. Sugar content at harvest is usually between 10 and 12 percent of 
the cane fresh weight, but under experimental conditions 18 percent or more has been 
observed. Sugar content seems to decrease slightly with increased cane yields. 
 
Luxurious growth should be avoided during cane ripening, which can be achieved by 
low temperature, low nitrogen level and restricted water supply. With respect to juice 
purity, low minimum temperatures positively affect this several weeks before harvest. 
 
Nutrient Deficiency Symptoms 
 
Nitrogen 
• 
Die back of older leaves. 
• 
Leaf baldes turn light green to yellow.

In the picture: Nitrogen deficiency symptom (Source: D.L. Anderson) 
• 
Short and slender stalks 
• 
Tips and margins of older leaves become necrotic. 
Phosphorus 
 
 
In the picture: phosphorus deficiency symptom

Red and purple discolouration of tips and margins 
Slender leaves 
Short sand slender stalks 
Poor or no tillering 
Potassium 
Yellow-orange chlorosis of leaf borders & tips 
Stalks slender 
Older leaves brown or "fired" 
Spindles distorted producing "bunched top" or "fan' appearance. 
Calcium 
Mottling and chlorosis of older leaves 
Spindles often become necrotic at the leaf tip and long margins 
Rusty appearance and premature death of older leaves 
Magnesium 
Mottled or chlorotic appearance at the tip and margins 
Red necrotic lesions resulting in "rusty" appearance 
Internal browning of rind 
 
In the picture (Source: D.L. Anderson): 
Magnesium deficiency symptom

Sulphur 
Chlorotic young leaves 
Narrower and shorter leaves with faint purplish tinge 
Slender stalks 
Copper 
Green splotches with leaves eventually showing bleaching 
Stalk and meristems lack turgidity 
Reduced internodal length and tillering. 
Iron 
Varying degrees of chlorosis 
Interveinal chlorosis from tip to base of leaves. 
 
 
In the picture : 
Iron deficiency symptom

Manganese 
Occurrence of interveinal chlorosis from leaf tip towards the middle of leaf. 
Bleaching of leaves under severe deficiency. 
Boron 
Distorted leaves 
Formation of translucent lesions or water sacks along leaf margins 
Brittle and bunched with many tillers 
Death of apical meristem. 
Molybdenum 
Short longitudinal chlorotic streaks on the top one-third of the leaf. 
Short and slender stalks 
Slow vegetative growth. 
 
 
In the picture: Molybdenum deficiency symptom (source: J.E. Bowen) 
 
Zinc 
Midrib and leaf margin remain green and yellowing of leaf blade 
Red lesions on leaves 
Reduced tillering and shorter internodes 
Thin stalks with loss of turgidity.

Pests and Diseases 
 
Matching with long diversity of conditions under which sugarcane is grown in the world, 
there is wide spectrum of pests and diseases which have come to acquire a place of 
priority for control on regional or inter-regional basis due to the agro-climatic 
management conditions associated with the area. 
 
In addition the susceptibility of the variety to the diseases and pests aggravates the 
situation and creates additive problems. Below herein is given a brief account of 
symptoms of important pests and diseases occurring in several parts of the world. For 
more information and pest and disease control measures consult the local Netafim 
Agronomist or Plant protection expert. 
 
Early Shoot Borer (Chilo infescatellus)- Symptoms 
 
Attacks the crop during the early part of cane growth, before internode 
formation. It also attacks the cane stalks in the years of scanty rainfall 
Larvae enter the cane laterally through one or more holes in the stalks (shoot) 
and bores downwards as well as upwards killing the growing point. Thus it cuts 
of the central leaf spindle, which eventually dries forming a â€˜dead heart'. The 
dead heart can be easily pulled out. It emits an offensive odour. 
Borer infestation during the germination phase kills the mother shoots resulting 
in the drying up of the entire clump. This leads to gaps in the field. 
Causes heavy yield losses as it affects the plant stand/unit area. It also leads to 
canes of different age, which will be poor in juice quality, with less cane weight. 
When borer infects cane stalks, both yield and quality are reduced. 
 
Internode Borer (Chilo Saccharifagus Indicus) - Symptoms 
 
Damages 
the 
crop 
soon 
after 
internode 
formation and its activity continues till hatvest 
Lodging, high dosage of nitrogen, waterlogged 
condition and presence of water shoots favour 
buildup of pest 
Fresh borer attack is mostly found in the top five 
immature internodes 
Caterpillars bore at the nodal region and enter 
the stem and tunnel up-wards in a characteristic 
spiral fashion. Entrance hole is usually plugged 
with excreta.

Larvae feed and multiply in water shoots. One larvae found in a single cane 
damages 1-3 internodes. The length and girth of the infected internodes get 
reduced. 
Yield loss and juice quality deterioration occurs when the infestation is severe 
(In the picture above: Internode borer damage) 
Top Borer (Scirpophaga Excerptalis) 
Waterlogging favours moth attack 
Larva first tunnels into the midrib of the leaves and causes a white streak which 
later turns reddish brown usually in the second to fifth leaf from the top. As a 
result of biting across the spindle, a number of shot holes are formed in the leaf. 
As larva nibbles into the central core of the cane a portion of the internal tissue 
is eaten resulting in dead heart formation. Dead heart when formed is reddish 
brown, appears charred, and cannot be easily pulled out. In tillering phase of 
the crop, the attacked shoots die, side shoots (tillers) develop producing a 
bunchy top appearance. In the grand growth period, the crop growth is arrested, 
and the crown with dead heart dries and may be blown off leaving the stump. 
Severe yield loss and quality deterioration occurs due to top borer. Depending 
upon the incidence level yield loss may be up to 20-30%. 
Scale Insect (Melanaspis Glomerata) 
Waterlogging, high temperature and humidity favour buildup of scale insect 
population. Rainwater and high wind velocity facilitate dispersal of the pest. It 
spreads to new areas through seed material. Men and animals passing through 
the infested fields also lead to spread of the pest to the adjoining areas. 
Scales usually establish on internodes covered with leaf sheath. The leaves of 
infested canes show signs of tip drying and unhealthy pale green colour and 
with continued infestation turn yellow. Desapping leads to non-opening of 
leaves also, which also turn yellow and finally dry out. Nodal region is more 
infested than internodal region. 
Infested crop losses its vigour, canes shrivel, growth is stunted and the 
internodal length is reduced drastically. Ultimately cane dries up. Such canes 
when slit open appear brownish red. Thus yield and quality suffer. The yield loss 
could range from negligible to total crop failure. 
Pyrilla (Pyrilla purpusilla Walker) 
Pyrilla is the most destructive foliage-sucking pest of sugarcane 
Heavy rainfall followed by 75-80% humidity, intermittent drought periods, high 
temperature (26-30°c) and wind movement favour rapid buildup of pyrilla. Other 
factors favouring pyrilla buildup are dense and luxuriant crop, excess nitrogen

application, water logging, lodging of cane and varieties with broad and 
succulent leaves. 
Adults and the nymps suck leaf sap from the under surface of the lower leaves. 
When the infestation is heavy, leaves turn yellowish white and wither away. Due 
to continuous desapping by large number of hoppers top leaves in the affected 
canes dry up and lateral buds germinate. The hoppers exude a sweet sticky 
fluid known as honeydew, which promotes quick and luxuriant growth of the 
fungus, capanodium species and as a result the leaves are completely covered 
by the sooty mould. This affects photosynthesis. 
The loss in cane yield due to pyrilla have been estimated to be around 28% with 
about 1.6% unit loss in sugar. 
Termites (Coptotermes Heimi Wasmann; Odontotermes Assmuthi Holmgr; O. 
Obesus Rambur; O. Wallonensis Wasmann; Microtermes Obesi Holmgr; 
Trinervitermes Biformis Wasmann) 
Polyphagous and found throughout the world. More serious under prolonged 
drought conditions and in light textured soils viz., sandy and sandy loam soils 
The termites attack setts, shoots, canes and also stubbles 
The termites gain entry through the cut ends or through buds of the setts and 
feed on the soft tissue. The tunnel excavated is filled with the soil. This affects 
germination and thus the initial crop stand and ultimately the cane yield. The 
germination failure could be up to 60%. 
In the stalks the termites feed on the inner tissues leaving the rind intact. The 
cavity formed is filled up with moist soil, having galleries, in which, they move 
about. The affected canes die. 
Whitefly (Aleurolobus Barodensis Mask) 
Waterlogging 
and 
nitrogen 
starvation cause severe out break 
of whiteflies. Summer droughts 
and dry spells during monsoon 
season also favour buildup of this 
pest 
Varieties with broad and long 
leaves are more susceptible to 
this pest 
The nymphs of white flies suck 
the sap from the under surface of 
leaves which turn yellow and 
pinkish in severe cases and 
gradually dry up. 
Heavy 
infested 
leaves 
are

covered by the sooty mould caused by the fungus, which adversely affects 
photosynthesis. The whitefly infestation retards cane growth and reduces sugar 
content 
Considerable loss on yield and sugar recovery has been observed. At 80% leaf 
infestation 23.4% loss in cane yield and 2.9% units loss in sucrose has been 
reported. (In the picture above: White fly infestation) 
Red Rot (Colletotrichum Falcatum) 
It is the most dreaded disease of sugarcane which has caused the elimination of 
several important sugarcane varieties from cultivation 
Yellowing and drying of leaves from margin to midrib, drying of the entire top 
including the crown, loss of natural colour and considerable shrinkage of the 
stalk, appearance of reddish lesions on the rind are some of the external 
symptoms of red rot disease. 
Most characteristic and diagnostic symptom of the disease is the presence of 
reddish discoloured patches or lesions interspersed with white horizontal 
patches on the internal tissue. As the diseases progresses the internal tissues 
become dark in colour and dry resulting in longitudinal pith cavities. 
Smut (Ustilago Scitaminea) 
Primary spread of the disease is through infected setts and the secondary 
spread is through wind borne teliospore 
Stunting of infected stools, profuse sprouting of lateral shoots i.e., tillers, 
reduction in internodal length, formation of thin stalks and narrow erect leaves 
are certain symptoms of smut. 
Characteristic symptom is the production of long whip like structure from the 
terminal bud of the stalk, which is black in colour covered by thin silvery 
membrane. This silvery membrane ruptures releasing millions of reproductive 
spores of smut fungus, which are present in the form of powdery mass. 
Losses due to smut in sugarcane depend on various factors viz., primary or 
secondary infection, plant or ratoon crop that is affected and early or late 
infection and have been reported to range from 30 - 40% in plant crops and 
even up to 70% in ratoons. Sucrose content of infected cane is reduced to 3 - 
7%. 
Pineapple Disease (Ceratocystis Paradoxa) 
Essentially a disease of seed material i.e., setts. Typical disease symptoms are 
detected in setts after 2 - 3 weeks of planting. 
Pathogen enters the sett mainly through the cut ends and destroy the central 
soft portion i.e., parachymatous tissues of the internode and then damages the 
buds.

Affected tissues first develop a reddish colour, which turns to brownish black in 
the later stages. Cavities are formed inside the severely affected internodes. 
The presence of the fungus inside the sett prevents their rooting. In most cases 
setts decay before bud sprouts or the shoots grown to an height of 6 - 12cm. 
Thus causing germination failure leading to reduced initial crop stand per unit 
area. 
Occasionally, the disease occurs in standing crop too due to the entry of the 
pathogen through stalk damaged by borers, rat damage or any such injuries. 
Drought accelerates the damage. Pathogen spreads rapidly throughout the 
canes, foliage turns yellow, and ultimately plant withers. The diseased stalk 
when cut open smells like mature pineapple. The pineapple odour is due to 
production of ethyl acetate by the fungus. 
Wilt (Cephalosporium Sacchari) 
Disease spreads through infected setts. The fungi gain entry mainly through 
injuries. 
Biotic stresses like nematode, root borer, termite, scales, mealy bugs etc and 
abiotic stresses like drought, water logging etc predispose the plants for wilt 
infection 
Moisture stress coupled with high temperature and low humidity reduces plant 
resistance to wilt. 
Typical wilt symptoms appear during monsoon and post monsoon periods. 
Affected plant appears wilted and conspicuously stunted. The crown leaves turn 
yellow, loose turgor and eventually withers. 
Wilt-affected canes loose their normal colour and are light in weight. The most 
characteristic symptom during the early stage of infection is the presence of 
diffused reddish brown patches on the internal tissue. Later canes become light 
and hallow and shrink. 
Disease reduces germination and in severe cases total cane yield losses occur 
due to drying up of shoots and wilting of the stalks. 
 
 
Ratoon Stunting Disease 
 
Ratoon stunting disease has been considered as the most important cause for 
sugarcane varietal degeneration 
Primary spread of the disease is through infected setts. 
Also spreads through harvesting implements contaminated with the juice of 
diseased canes. 
Expression of disease is more under adverse conditions.

Progressive yield decline takes place due to the disease. Ratoon crop suffers 
more damage due to RSD than the plant 
crop. 
Disease is known to reduce germination 
and yield 
Most characteristic symptom of the infected 
stalks is the presence of pin head like 
orange coloured dots of bacteria on the 
internal soft tissue in the nodal region. 
Other symptoms include stunted growth, 
thin stalks with short internodes, pale 
yellowish foliage and rapid tapering of the 
stem 
towards 
the 
top 
 
 
(In the picture above: Ratoon stunting disease 
symptom) 
 
Grassy Shoot Disease (Phytoplasma) 
It is a mycoplasamal disease. 
Primary transmission of disease is through disease infected setts 
Profuse tillering with narrow chlorotic leaves giving a grass like appearance is 
characteristic symptom of GSD incidence 
Very few tillers of GSD infected plants develop into canes, which are thin and 
produce white shoots from the side buds. 
Leaf Scald (Xanthomonas Albileneans) 
It is a bacterial disease, widely spread in many countries. 
Disease is favoured by wet seasons, water stress due to drought, water logging 
and low temperatures. 
Disease symptoms appear in two phases, the chronic and acute phases. 
In the chronic phase, "white pencil line" extending entire length of lamina 
reaching the margin of young leaves and stripes diffuse later resulting in leaf 
etiolation. Drying from tip onwards presents a scalded appearance and hence 
the name. Different degrees of chlorosis from total albinism to interveinal 
chlorosis in young leaves during summer, germination of buds in acropetal 
manner with bushy appearance in standing cane, cut open stalks showing dark 
red vascular strands, prominent streaks at node invariably in the side shoots, 
are other prominent symptoms of chronic phase.

In the acute phase the symptoms appear suddenly and die without any major 
leaf symptoms. The masking of symptoms is more common during monsoon 
and symptoms may appear suddenly any time during crop growth. 
 
Yellow Leaf Spoot (Cercospora Koepkei) 
 
Prolonged rain with intermittent sunshine, 
waterlogged conditions and higher nitrogen 
doses are congenial for disease development. 
Warm humid weather favours rapid and 
abundant 
production 
of 
conidia 
by 
the 
pathogen and sopread of the disease. 
Characteristic symptoms are presence of 
small, yellow coloured, irregularly shaped 
spots over the leaf surface. Density of spots is 
minimum in the lower surface, moderate in the 
middle and maximum towards the tip of the 
leaf. Spots coalesce at late stages and cause 
drying of leaves. Badly affected foliage looks 
reddish-brown when viewed from a distance. 
In the picture: Yellow leaf spot showing small yellow coloured spots 
 
Eye spot (Helminthosporium sacchari) 
Usually a crop of 6 - 7 months is more susceptible to the disease. 
Fungus penetrates the host tissue either through stomota, bulliform cells or 
directly through the cuticle. 
Cloudy weather, high humidity with drizzle coupled with low night temperatures, 
wetting of leaves either through precipitation or dew greatly enhance disease 
development. 
Likewise water logging, high fertility status and excess nitrogen fertilization also 
favour the spread of the disease. 
Lesions first appear as small water soaked spots, darker than the surrounding 
tissues. The spot becomes more elongated, resembling the shape of an â€˜eye' 
and turns straw coloured within a few days. Finally the central portion becomes 
reddish brown surrounded by straw coloured tissues. Then reddish brown 
streaks of â€˜runners' develop extending from the lesions towards the leaf tip 
along the veins. Later the spots and streaks coalesce to form large patches and 
causes drying of leaves. 
- The End -